 Go back to the first slide in this lesson. For that reason, the negatives outweigh any positives, and we believe that H. pylori should be addressed if detected. By addressed,
[6:10 - 6:17] slide 100:  well, we'll address that in the protocols, but it's important that H. pylori be suppressed.











Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos – Slides 101-112
Lesson 8: Bacterial, Parasitic, Viral Pathogens – 
So Simple Even a Caveman Can Do It
[0:03 - 0:28] slide 101:  Ah, lesson eight. Bacterial parasitic viral pathogens. I say, so simple, even a caveman can do it. And some people might not like that. But as I first looked at a GI map, I noticed that the first page was pathogens. Pathogens. Pathogens means disease-causing. Pathogenic.
[0:28 - 0:42] slide 101:  They're pathogenic bacteria, parasite, viral. We're going to go through them, but I want you to start thinking about why did they separate these bugs from the rest of the bugs?
[0:43 - 1:05] slide 101:  And we went through pages of other bugs that when out of balance and when contributing to Metabolic Chaos could be pathogenic. So why did they separate these ones out? Well, here's the reason. Because They're pathogenic at any level.
[1:06 - 1:29] slide 101:  So, in other words, these are just things you never want to see. And they put them on the first page because physicians who make up most of DSL's customers, I mean, FDNs, we're a nice chunk of change for them. Believe me, we're running right now hundreds of labs a month. FDNs are running hundreds of DSL GI maps a month.
[1:29 - 1:51] slide 101:  So, we've You know, we have a voice over there. But there are, if you add up all the MDs who are running this stuff, they're running thousands. So, the reason that they cater to the physicians is obvious. But physicians want to look at what's pathogenic so that they can put down a diagnosis code on their insurance billing.
[1:52 - 2:13] slide 101:  And they can say, hey, you know, this is the diagnosis and here's the treatment. They can write the prescription. That's why I say it's so simple, even a caveman can do it. Because anyone who looks at the first page, like I've got a copy in my hand of a DSL GI map. And it says, oh, this is high and that's high. Oh, I know a prescription right for that.

[2:13 - 2:27] slide101 :  No one needs to look at the rest of the test and figure out what's the imbalances, what's the commensal flora, and what are all these other things that don't mean much to a physician who's just trying to write a prescription for the worst thing they have.
[2:28 - 2:45] slide 101:  And so, we're going to let Whitney go over those now. And look, these are important. These are things that we need to also recognize. Matter of fact, if you have a DSL GI map in your hands, as I do, hear that?
[2:47 - 3:23] slide 101:  Then you've got four pages of lab report, all of which could mean something to an individual person. The first page that lists pathogens could mean something also, and it could be important. As a matter of fact, the first page is where if you do see some positives, you probably should use the rule that these are diagnostic for gastroenteritis. They could also be chronic, and that would be something that you'd want to rule out. So, if you have a positive on one of the following part of this lesson,
[3:24 - 3:45] slide 101:  then you definitely want to make sure you refer out. So, tell the client they need to go see their doctor. These are considered quite pathogenic. And then you take it from there. Most customers aren't going to want to do that. If they do it, well, you saved them. You know, you send them to their doctor. All right. Whitney, take it away.
[3:46 – 4:01] slide 102:  Hey, everybody. Welcome back. I'm not going to read everything that's written on each slide, most likely, though I'll try to. I might just hit some of the highlights here and there. So, if you are listening to this addendum rather than watching it, you'll definitely want to review each slide.
[4:02 - 4:27] slide 102:  Okay, so the first bug we're looking at is Campylobacter. This is one of the most common causes of foodborne illnesses in the U.S., but the vast majority of infected people recover without treatment. Now, it can be infectious at very low exposure levels and persist for several days or weeks. Elevated levels are associated with fever, malaise, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea, often bloody diarrhea.
[4:28 - 4:45] slide 102:  And chronic infection is implicated in the development of Guillain-Barre syndrome. And that's a rare autoimmune disease where the immune system attacks the peripheral nervous system, causing things like paralysis, difficulty swallowing, speaking, and also bladder issues.

[4:47 - 5:20] slide 103:  Now, rather than looking for the DNA signature of the C. diff bacteria, C. diff is identified as positive when the lab detects the genes that encode for these toxins. And we often think of C. diff as an acute and potentially lethal infection, but many people can have mild to moderate cases of C. diff that result in occasional diarrhea and cramping. The toxins released by C. diff damage the gut lining, but mild to moderate cases can be crowded out with high-dose Saccharomyces boulardii. Low levels of bifida bacteria
[5:20 - 5:33] slide 103:  can allow clostridium species to proliferate, so you always want to take a look at that. And in asymptomatic clients, the genes for the toxins A and B are probably not turned on, and antibiotic use should be avoided.
[5:34 - 5:49] slide 103:  Now, elevated levels are associated with an active infection, persistent diarrhea, colitis, and reactive arthritis. [slide 104] There are many strains of E. coli, some beneficial, some harmless in normal amounts, and some pathogenic.
[5:49 - 6:02] slide 104:  Though I've certainly seen GI map results where the pathogenic strains of E. coli are either positive or elevated, I have yet to see a case where the results actually correlate back to the client.
[6:03 - 6:15] slide 104:  Okay, so here we have enterohemorrhagic I'm sorry, Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli and Escherichia coli 0157. Now, the symptoms of an acute infection can last up to one week.
[6:16 - 6:32] slide 104:  Both of these are implicated in hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic uremic syndrome. So, antibiotics are often contraindicated. Elevated levels are associated with fatigue, a fever, abdominal cramping, nausea, and diarrhea.
[6:33 - 6:50] slide 104:  The Enteroinvasive Escherichia coli, is another form, another virulent form of E. coli, and it binds to and enters intestinal cells, causing some pretty severe structural damage. But the strain doesn't produce any toxins and is also self-limiting, usually.
[6:50 - 7:12] slide 104:  Elevated levels are associated with profuse diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and high fever. [slide 105] Enterotoxigenic E. coli, LT/ST, this colonizes 

in the small intestine and produces two toxins. That's the heat labile, or LT, and heat stable, ST.
[7:13 - 7:46] slide 105:  Both toxins cause some cell linings to secrete excess fluid, producing similar symptoms. It's often transient and resolves within four to seven days but can last several weeks. Elevated levels are associated with what we typically refer to as traveler's diarrhea, because diarrhea is the primary symptom. Now, Shiga-like toxin E. coli, stx1 and stx2, the stx1 and stx2 are actually the virulent factors that initiate the strong inflammatory response of this pathogen.
[7:47 - 8:05] slide 105:  But the illness is, again, usually self-limiting, can be mild. But stx2 has been associated with hemolytic uremic syndrome, so also antibiotics are typically contraindicated. Elevated levels associated with severe abdominal cramping and diarrhea.
[8:08 - 8:28] slide 106:  Salmonella is often transient and self-limiting, but you can have systemic infections that require antibiotic treatment. For mild cases of salmonella, antibiotics are often contraindicated because they can cause a relapse of the infection, actually. Salmonella produces pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharides.
[8:29 - 8:41] slide 106:  And if you guys aren't familiar with that, these are the endotoxins that can actually open up those tight junctions in the small intestine and in the mucosal barrier and create a leaky gut.
[8:41 - 9:04] slide 106:  And then they can just get into the circulatory system and wreak havoc across multiple systems in the body. All right, elevated levels of salmonella are associated with severe diarrhea, fever, abdominal cramping, and vomiting, also implicated in the development of reactive arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis.
[9:06 - 9:29] slide 107:  The pathogen Vibrio cholerae produces pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharides, Now, infections of Vibrio can cause mild symptoms. Folks can be asymptomatic. But elevated levels are usually associated with profuse, watery diarrhea, vomiting, and rapid heart rate, irritability, loss of skin elasticity, and thirst.
[9:30 - 10:11] slide 107:  Now, a Vibrio cholerae infection may also require rehydration therapy and zinc supplementation, especially in children. [slide 108] Yersinia enterocolitica. also produces pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharides. Now, symptoms don't usually appear 

until four to seven days after someone's exposed, and symptoms can mimic an appendicitis or even Crohn's disease. Now, the Yersinia proteins are very similar in shape to TSH receptors, and that's, you know, the thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary gland. So, this pathogen can be a factor in some autoimmune thyroid conditions.
[10:12 - 10:25] slide 108:  Elevated levels are associated with bloody diarrhea, fever and vomiting, and abdominal pain. And like I said, it's implicated in thyroid autoimmunity, but also in the development of inflammatory arthritis.
[10:26 - 10:36] slide 108:  Now, keep in mind, most common bacterial pathogens will produce such severe symptoms that anyone with an acute infection wouldn't be seeking our help anyway.
[10:37 - 11:14] slide 108:  They wouldn't be coming to an FDN practitioner. They would probably be in the ER. So that does it for the bacterial pathogens. And in general, when a GI map report indicates the presence of bacterial pathogens, whether they're positive or elevated levels, it's important to correlate back to your client. Inquiring as to any past or recent bouts of food poisoning or international travel can offer some insight into test interpretation. And of course, if clients are presenting with inflammatory arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, or thyroid autoimmunity, any results that correlate with these conditions are definitely of note.
[11:16 - 11:44] slide 109:  So, the next section in the GI map is the parasitic pathogen section, the first of which is cryptosporidium. Now, crypto is an infection that lasts two to three weeks usually and is self-limiting, but it can become chronic and lead to some ongoing digestive issues, particularly constipation. Now, this is a very invasive intracellular parasite It migrates in and out of the cells on a seven-day cycle, and it destroys the cells that it inhabits.
[11:45 - 12:00] slide 109:  It can proliferate throughout the entire GI tract and break down the mucosal barrier, and it can also cause widespread histological changes. Elevated levels are associated with watery diarrhea, gas, bloating, abdominal pain, and constipation.
[12:03 - 12:23] slide 110:  Entamoeba histolytica is a parasite that can bore into the intestinal wall and can migrate to the liver, lungs, brain, and other parts of the body. It can 

become a pretty serious infection, so I always recommend that you refer out to an MD for a follow-up because antibiotic treatment is often the preferred method of treatment.
[12:24 - 12:55] slide 110:  Now, Entamoeba histolytica can be difficult to detect with microscopy because it looks very similar to Entamoeba dispar and Entamoeba hartmanii. Elevated levels are associated with diarrhea, fulminating colitis, dysentery, irritable bowel syndrome, multiple chemical sensitivity, liver inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, canker sores, hives, and polyarthritis. So, you can see
[12:55 - 13:14] slide 110:  just how destructive this little guy can be. Now, if a client decides not to seek the advice of their MD and pursue antibiotic treatment, you can certainly offer an antimicrobial protocol, but I would make sure that you put it in writing that you recommend they follow up with their MD and get their signature on whatever document that you produce for them.
[13:17 - 13:36] slide 111:  All right, Giardia colonizes and reproduces in the small intestine. This parasite can absorb nutrients from the lumen. which leads to malabsorption, particularly a B12 deficiency, and also impairs the absorption of fat. So, you also have to be concerned about your fat-soluble vitamins.
[13:37 - 13:51] slide 111:  Now, interestingly, giardia can increase immune reactions to food antigens, and that includes gluten, and can stimulate hyperpermeability of the gut. So, it can really set the stage for leaky gut, for autoimmunity.
[13:52 - 14:22] slide 111:  It can be a triggering event for gluten-sensitive folks or people who carry the genes for celiac disease. Giardia can cause extensive pro-inflammatory dysbiosis, and it increases the proteobacteria phylum, and those are gram-negative bacteria that produce pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharides, and it can also decrease the Firmicutes phylum, and those are gram-positive bacteria, and we'll talk about these phyla a little bit later.
[14:23 - 15:04] slide 111:  Giardia can migrate to the bile ducts and the gallbladder. So, it can kind of hang out there and hide. And then, after, you know, someone undergoes treatment for Giardia, it can then reseed the small intestine and you can get a reinfection of the parasite throughout the GI tract. So, Giardia can become a chronic infection. And elevated levels are associated with diarrhea, constipation, bloating, abdominal cramping, weight loss, 

reactive arthritis, irritable bowel syndrome, multiple chemical sensitivity, chronic fatigue, depression, urticaria, sleep disorders, and irritability.
[15:07 - 15:23] slide 112:  Right, now let's talk about viral pathogens. There's two on the GI map, Adenovirus 40 and 41. The symptoms resulting from Adenovirus 40 tend to be more intense than the 41 version, both of which resolve in one to two weeks.
[15:24 - 15:55] slide 112:  But the virus can be shed in the stool for several months. So just because it shows up on a GI map doesn't mean that it's still there. Elevated levels are associated with gastroenteritis, including symptoms of watery diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and fever. Norovirus, the G1 and G2, This is the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis worldwide and very common on cruise ships. It's highly contagious, but usually just lasts two to three days.
[15:56 - 16:10] slide 112:  Elevated levels are associated with nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, low-grade fever, muscle aches, fatigue, headaches, and also norovirus will damage the microvilli of the small intestine.
[16:11 - 16:22] slide 112:  It's easy to see how these viral, parasitic, and bacterial pathogens, regardless of their transient nature, might contribute to subsequent chronic health issues.
[16:23 - 16:41] slide 112:  The production of pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharides, the ability to destroy cells, to break down the gut lining and absorb nutrients, all of these effects can have long-term implications for the health of our clients and also set the stage for more gut infections and Metabolic Chaos in general.









Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos – Slides 113-123
Lesson 9: DSL GI MAP Intestinal Health Markers
[0:01 - 0:27] slide 113:  Fantastic. Whitney's been doing a great job. She just went over the pathogenic bacteria and viruses and parasites and things. We talked a lot about those being the most diagnosable, treatable, and they're all causes of gastroenteritis. So, these are things that doctors like to play with and what they're good at. And there's a real space for that.
[0:29 - 1:17] slide 113:  I want you to notice that I put that section of the lab report last instead of first like they had it. What I wanted to do was go through the progression of phases in Metabolic Chaos or the downward spiral of the stress cascade or the Metabolic Chaos cascade or what have you and tell you that those things that we just looked at, those pathogens, they could come along at any time. And you might see them there. The question would be whether they're transient or whether they need to be treated. And the only way to figure it out really is to look at all the rest of the lab work and the client and how well are they doing and do they need to be treated.
[1:18 - 1:29] slide 113:  And you can make that call. That's one of the keys to FDN is making the call. And what you have to think about is what would you do if it was you or your mom?
[1:33 - 1:58] slide 113:  And that's what you tell the client. And you never do anything different with your mom than you would do with the client. There's no shortcuts for anybody. And a few years ago, after many years of my sister, who teaches nursing, telling her that FDN is stuff Reed does up in California, but they don't go for that here in Ohio. She literally told my mom stuff like that. So finally, my mom asked me for some help.
[1:59 - 2:24] slide 113:  I did nothing different. I stuck to the book. I ran five labs. I gave her her D.R.E.S.S. protocol. And she's now 91 years old, doing fantastic, and pretty pleased that she's on her supplements and eating her Metabolic Typing diet and getting her exercise and all these things. She goes to yoga class three times a week. She's 91. And it's amazing. So, she'll be 91 in May.

[2:25 - 2:37] slide 113:  All right, folks, so here we go. We're going to talk now in Lesson 9 about the DSL-GI-MAP intestinal health markers. They do put a few markers on here.
[2:38 - 2:52] slide 114:  For the most part, I'm going to let Whitney explain. And I'm not, you know, all bent out of shape or super excited about all of these, but some of them are great markers. This one here is the Zonulin you've seen before.
[2:53 - 3:27] slide 114:  And remember, these are just things we use in the overall impression of the client. As a matter of fact, I think Whitney goes to this area first. Why? Because she knows that the mucosal barrier assessment and the metabolic wellness panel and, you know, even the hormone tests come first. It's assessing the terrain before you decide what's going on with the bugs. Are they really a factor or they're really just part of the Metabolic Chaos. And so, with that, I think we'll just turn it over to her.
[3:29 - 3:44] slide 115:  There are two digestion markers on the GI map, elastase 1 and steatocrit. Elastase is a marker for endogenous pancreatic enzyme production. It's a digestive enzyme that's produced by the pancreas to help break down proteins.
[3:45 - 4:00] slide 115:  It can influence and be influenced by blood sugar dysregulation but the levels will not be affected by any pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. So, if your client does take digestive enzymes, it will not impact elastase 1 levels.
[4:01 - 4:34] slide 115:  Low levels are associated with suppressed pancreatic functions, pancreatic inflammation, malabsorption, low hydrochloric acid, gallstones, and vegan and vegetarian diets. Levels below 200 indicate pancreatic insufficiency, And levels between 2 and 500 would indicate decreased pancreatic output. But anything below 350, your client most likely has low hydrochloric acid. So, where we want elastase to measure is above 500. That would indicate pancreatic sufficiency.
[4:36 - 4:54] slide 116:  Steatocrit is a measure of fat absorption in the small intestine. High levels are associated with pancreatic insufficiency, bile salt insufficiency, low hydrochloric acid, celiac disease, maldigestion, malabsorption, steatorrhea, and improper mastication.
[4:55 - 5:11] slide 116:  Now, elastase and steatocrit should always be evaluated together. If either marker is out of range, some level of digestive insufficiency can be assumed. Both 

markers being out of range may reflect a more serious level of compromised digestive function.
[5:13 - 5:48] slide 117:  There are two immune markers on the test. secretory IgA, and antigliadin IgA. Secretory IgA, or SIgA, is an immune globulin secreted into the GI tract that influences the microbiome and helps to maintain mucosal barrier function. It's our first line of immune defense against antigens and pathogens in the GI and respiratory tracts, and it protects against exposure to food-derived antigens. It forms complexes with gut pathogens and allergens, thereby preventing them from crossing the mucosal barrier. And levels can be severely impacted by chronic stress.
[5:49 - 6:19] slide 117:  Now, elevated levels are associated with immune system activation by food antigens and or pathogens, stress, food allergies, and food sensitivities. Low levels are associated with chronic dysbiosis, chronic exposure to food antigens, chronic stress, immune-compromised clients, protein malnutrition, increased risk of intestinal infections and inflammation, And levels below 200 may indicate a total shutdown of immune function in the gut.
[6:21 - 6:34] slide 118:  Antigliadin IgA is an indicator of the immune system's response to the gliadin component of the gluten protein. Now, fecal antigliadin levels don't necessarily correlate with blood levels.
[6:35 - 7:04] slide 118:  Gliadin can stimulate a local intestinal immunity and increase levels of this marker even when serum concentrations are remain undetectable. Now, this marker is often used as a screening for celiac disease and non-celiac gluten sensitivity. But because there are many other components of gluten that can provoke an immune response, normal levels of this marker cannot rule out either celiac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity.
[7:05 - 7:23] slide 118:  Basically, my rule of thumb is this marker is only relevant when it's elevated or if it's been elevated on a first GI maps and it has normalized on a follow-up test, then that can be considered relevant when it's within normal limits.
[7:25 - 7:48] slide 118:  Elevated levels are associated with localized immune response to gluten, also can be associated with celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity, low elastase, low hydrochloric acid, undigested food particles, and additional food sensitivities, 

particularly those foods known to cross-react with gluten like corn, dairy, millet, oats, rice, and yeast.
[7:49 - 8:11] slide 118:  Always consider additional food sensitivity testing when this marker is out of range. Now keep in mind if intestinal Sig A is insufficient, the immune response to gliadin may be suppressed. Conversely, when Sig A is elevated, the immune response to gliadin can increase and antigliadin IgA will rise.
[8:13 - 8:44]  119:  Beta-glucuronidase is an enzyme naturally produced by the liver, kidneys, and intestinal epithelium. It can be excessively produced by multiple dysbiotic and pathogenic bacteria, in particular Bacteroides fragilis, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus are the three bacteria on the GI map that can really contribute to elevated levels of B-glucuronidase. Now, this enzyme disrupts the body's ability to detoxify hormones and toxins.
[8:45 - 9:07] slide 119:  Glucuronidation is an important part of phase 2 conjugation. This is where glucuronic acid gets attached to the target chemical and then excretes the chemical complex into the bile. Now, B-glucuronidase will break this bond, allowing for the recycling of toxins and hormones back to the liver and to other tissues.
[9:08 - 9:25] slide 119:  Elevated levels are associated with overgrowth of opportunistic bacteria, liver congestion, compromised detoxification, estrogen dominance, and many extraintestinal symptoms that are related to an increased body burden.
[9:28 - 9:46] slide 120:  Occult blood - FIT measures the concentration of hemoglobin that's present in the stool, and research indicates that levels greater than 10 are associated with an increased risk of disease. So, you always want to refer out to an MD or a GI specialist for immediate follow-up when occult blood is elevated.
[9:47 - 9:59] slide 120:  Elevated levels are associated with diverticulitis, intestinal polyps, bleeding ulcers, colorectal cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, and upper GI bleeds that cause iron-deficient anemia.
[10:01 - 10:19] slide 120:  Now, for your own reference, levels between 5 and 9 typically indicate hemorrhoids, whereas levels greater than 10, in particular between 10 and 50, usually indicate one or many polyps or perhaps diverticulitis.

[10:21 - 10:44] slide 121:  Calprotectin is a marker indicating the level of localized inflammation in the gut. It's one of the most studied markers of GI inflammation, and the sensitivity and specificity of this marker has been found to be in the range of 93 to 95%. Having said that, calprotectin can be influenced by several factors and can change rather quickly.
[10:45 - 11:08] slide 121:  It can elevate from the use of NSAIDs, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, So it's best to avoid NSAIDs prior to testing. Now, in approximately 2% of the population, the response to inflammatory organisms may not be reflected by calprotectin. Those folks might just produce lactoferrin or not be able to produce either due to low white blood cell count in general.
[11:10 - 11:20] slide 121:  Calprotectin can rise 7% every year in people who smoke cigarettes. And it can also rise 40% for every 20 pounds or 10 kilograms of excess weight.
[11:22 - 11:50] slide 122:  So zonulin is a marker that's available to add on to the GI map when you order it. And if your client is amenable to paying the extra fee, I recommend that you do so. Zonulin is a protein secreted by intestinal cells, and its role is to open up the tight junctions. Now, this is a necessary function, but it is subject to excess. Two things that can really increase zonulin levels are dysbiotic gut bacteria and gluten.
[11:51 - 12:07] slide 122:  And keep in mind that you don't have to be gluten sensitive in order for gluten to increase zonulin levels. It does it in everybody, regardless of sensitivity. Now, zonulin levels are subject to rapid change, and they can appear normal even within the context of a leaky gut.
[12:08 - 12:39] slide 122:  In effect, I really think that anti-zonulin antibodies are a more accurate predictor of leaky gut, but this is still a good screening tool. Now, it's interesting to note that glyphosate, which is the main ingredient in Roundup, is 10 times more potent than gluten at dysregulating the zonulin pathway. And it's pretty common for glyphosate and gluten to show up in the gut together since glyphosate is used to desiccate many crops. So together, they can really wreak havoc on the gut. Elevated levels
[12:39 - 13:01] slide 122:  of zonulin are associated with hyperpermeability of the mucosal barrier, ingestion of gluten, and the overgrowth of opportunistic bacteria. [slide 123] Intestinal health markers can help you form an overall impression of your client. And like I 

mentioned before, I will often review this section first before I look at the remainder of the test results.
[13:02 - 13:25] slide 123:  And if you understand the way in which the intestinal health markers interact with one another, you know, the threat of continuity between them and the similar contributing factors when one or more of them are out of range. When you understand how they interplay, then it allows you to think more critically about what else you're seeing on the GI map.
[13:26 - 13:41] slide 123:  All right, Whitney, thanks. Good job there, going over the intestinal health markers. I wanted to circle back to this. We started this lesson out with it. and just so you'd see what you're going to be looking at, what we're going to be talking about this lesson.
[13:41 - 13:58] slide 123:  And I think Whitney's comments about looking at this first makes sense, although keep in mind you've already looked at cortisol to DHEA, you looked at indican, UBAS, you've looked at 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, or 8-OHDG as we call it.
[13:59 - 14:22] slide 123:  You've also looked at the mucosal barrier assessment, looked at zonulin, histamine, DAO. You may have run the intestinal permeability test on top of that. So, you see blunted brush border. You see the flattened villi. You see the leaky gut from a physical point of view and all that. So, you already have a ton of good information on what the landscape looks like.
[14:22 - 14:45] slide 123:  And I think that's really, really critical. So, here's a few more markers that may give you some insights into the landscape. and into the causes and effects of dysbiosis and all the worst things that happen, the gut, the condition of the gut. So, I would look at this insofar as here's what's wrong.
[14:46 - 14:56] slide 123:  You know, the cortisol to DHEA, the metabolic wellness panel, the mucosal barrier assessment, they're what's wrong and what the healing opportunities are.
[14:57 - 15:09] slide 123:  The bugs are part of the milieu contributing to Metabolic Chaos, you know, the result of and contributors to Metabolic Chaos. And sometimes the lines are blurred.

[15:10 - 15:32] slide 123:  And so here we just want to pick up on some additional markers that could be used to show improvement or to guide some therapy. and there's some good ones here. The zonulin on this test, I have to say, I agree with Whitney, it's not as good as the zonulin on the mucosal barrier assessment. You want to use antibodies for zonulin.
[15:32 - 15:58] slide 123:  But some of the other markers here are great. The pancreatic enzyme elastase, the steatocrit tells you that you're bile deficient for the most part. The secretory IgA here, we've talked a lot about it, but we haven't really seen a marker yet that tells you that your mucosal barrier is weak, that it doesn't have enough secretory IgA in it, and so on and so on. So good job, Whitney. Appreciate all that.
[15:58 - 16:25] slide 123:  And we'll be going on to the next lesson. You guys are really getting there. You're doing amazing work. You're going to be able to go out into the world and do some fantastic work. You should start lining up your clients now because when you graduate, you can just start charging them and sending out the kits and helping them. You'll have all the information on the protocols in the next section after we get through with the lab testing section.
[16:26 - 16:31] slide 123:  So, we're coming up on some really good times and some really good information and more great training.











Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos – Slides 124-129
Lesson 10: Clinical Correlation and Therapeutic Priorities
[0:02 - 0:21] slide 124:  Here we are. Clinical Correlation and Therapeutic Priorities by Whitney Morgan coming right up. I just want to say fantastic, great job. This is one of the longest modules. It's 144 slides long and quite a bit of information. You've been taking it like a champ.
[0:22 - 1:14] slide 124:  And if you learn how to coordinate the DSL-GI map and the other ways of stool testing, and remember we also looked at the Candida suite, when you put this together with the other labs that you've already run, and then you run the next lab too for food sensitivities basically, you'll have a very complete picture of what's going on with the person. You'll sort it out, a lot of Metabolic Chaos, and you'll be able to give them a protocol. You'll have to learn the protocols, go through all that section, but it's going to be amazing and you've crushed the hardest parts. So, let's just listen to what Whitney has to say about clinical correlation and therapeutic priorities. There's one more lesson after that, and we'll be done with Module 6. Again, fantastic job.
[1:16 - 1:39] slide 125:  So, in addition to using some of these patterns to help you develop your impression of your client, it's also super important, as always, to do clinical correlation. So, all of your client's symptoms, health history, whatever diagnoses that they might have, always try and find correlation with all of the individual markers on the GI map.
[1:40 - 2:07] slide 125:  Now, GI symptoms are very easily correlated. And what I tend to find when I'm doing clinical advising sessions with FDN practitioners is that the common mistake that I see people make is they stop at the GI correlation. It's like, okay, well, my client has gas and bloating and, you know, intermittent constipation and diarrhea, and that correlates with this bug or that bug.
[2:08 - 2:38] slide 125:  But they don't necessarily go the extra mile and dig down into perhaps some of the other symptoms that someone's having or something like, you know, hey, correlating the Hashimoto's or correlating joint pain or just autoimmunity in general, 

headaches, itchy skin. things like that. These extra intestinal symptoms are very, very important to make sure that you get that clinical correlation down as well. Not only for yourself,
[2:39 - 3:18] slide 125:  but if you want to be as successful as you possibly can be at retaining clients and getting referrals and building your business, you need to be able to draw a line between every single complaint that your client has, to something that's showing up in the labs that you're running. And in order to do, I mean, you can't always do that. Not everything correlates, but I guarantee you 80% of the stuff that they're complaining about is going to correlate with something in the labs that you're running as long as you're paying attention. So, use these slides,
[3:19 - 4:03] slide 125:  you know, all the organism slides. Develop a cheat sheet for yourself, whatever you have to do so that you can quickly draw that line for yourself. Make a list of all of the symptoms that your client is complaining of all of their health history. And then look at your cheat sheet that you've developed and just start drawing those lines. And that'll help you develop your picture. It'll help you develop your protocol. It'll also help you in making decisions about what additional tests to run. And in the end, your client is going to be pretty impressed that you've spent that time really putting the rubber to the road and making sure that you're digging deep into all of their lab results and providing them with some real value.
[4:05 - 4:27] slide 125:  So, in the next couple of slides, I've just developed these little graphics that give you a sense of what I mean by correlating the individual markers with particular symptoms or disease. So, in the case of autoimmune disease, All of these markers can correlate. But what I tend to see in my practice is blasto shows up a lot.
[4:28 - 4:39] slide 125:  Antigliadin is often elevated. Secretory IgA is almost always low. Now, calprotectin and zonulin can go either way because they both change pretty quick.
[4:40 - 5:04] slide 125:  I rarely see occult blood being elevated in autoimmune disease, but Sometimes it happens, but almost always I see autoimmune triggers either being elevated or just moderate levels, right, e2, e3, something like that. Every now and then I'll also see a viral marker being elevated, but that's also kind of rare.

[5:05 - 5:15] slide 125:  Now with joint pain in the graphic here, you'll see all of the markers that could potentially correlate. Again, with joint pain, I see almost always see autoimmune triggers there.
[5:17 - 5:42] slide 125:  Every now and then Giardia. Giardia actually is more common than you'd think. But usually, I see it positive but not elevated. B-glucuronidase is often elevated as is antigliadin. C. diff toxin A and B is also very common. Salmonella too, but that's more of your transient thing, so you never know if what you're seeing is, you know, already left the system.
[5:43 - 5:57] slide 125:  But anyway, this gives you a good sense of what you might be looking at. [slide 126] All right, elevated thyroid antibodies. Blasto is very common. Antigliadin is very common. So is B-glucuronidase and also Giardia.
[5:58 - 6:18] slide 126:  I rarely see Entamoeba histolytica and, of course, zonulin. Every now and then it's elevated when someone has a thyroid issue, but not always. I don't see a lot of chronic fatigue folks, but I have here and there, and blasto is pretty common. So is glucuronidase, and so is giardia.
[6:19 - 6:39] slide 126:  With irritable bowel syndrome, I mean, you know, that's a pretty common complaint, and I always find that there are several things that correlate on someone's GI map results. So, remember that correlation is valid even if particular pathogens or opportunistic organisms aren't clinically elevated.
[6:39 - 7:10] slide 126:  All they need to be is detectable, even at just moderate levels, and that still might be significant. So, like I said before earlier in the addendum here is make sure that you are not just paying attention to what the lab is flagging as high or low. And as we go through some of these case studies, you're going to see that, you know, hey, it's pretty easy, actually, to just get distracted by what's written in red and what's written in orange. You know, that's how they flag high and low.
[7:11 - 7:35] slide 126:  And everything else can kind of disappear. And that's a common mistake that I also see when I'm doing clinical advising sessions is that the practitioners aren't paying attention to those things that are present at moderate levels. They're just paying attention to what's clinically elevated or clinically low. So, make sure that, you know, you're seeing the whole picture.

[7:36 - 7:47] slide 126:  Bottom line, when you dig into the results, it's rare that you can't find some correlation with a client's health history, their symptoms, or their main complaint. So just go slow.
[7:48 - 8:21] slide 126:  Use your cheat sheet. Pay attention to the details. and you'll be fine. [slide 127] So, once you've determined whether or not a client's results fits with a certain pattern of dysbiosis, once you've gone through all of the clinical correlation, you've drawn those lines for yourself, you've really developed a fully fleshed out impression of your client, then it's time to take a look at what are your priorities therapeutically and how best are you going to develop your protocols.
[8:22 - 8:36] slide 127:  So, the graphic on the right here is one that Diagnostic Solutions provides in some of its documentation, and it goes over the 5R protocol, which is pretty well established in the functional world.
[8:37 - 8:56] slide 127:  So, the 5R protocol are based on the following concepts, remove, replace, re-inoculate, repair, and rebalance. So, removal, of course applies to all of those opportunistic bacterial infections, parasites, yeast and fungi.
[8:56 - 9:26] slide 127:  But remove also pertains to other stressors on the gut. So, food components that damage the mucosal barrier, toxic exposures like heavy metals, exposures to herbicides and pesticides and phthalates and parabens, all those kinds of things. So, you want to make sure that you're thinking, beyond gut pathogens, and really about everything that could possibly be irritating the gut lining and creating imbalance in the ecosystem.
[9:27 - 9:39] slide 127:  The second R, replace, pertains to the replacement of digestive support like hydrochloric acid, digestive enzymes, bitters, bile salts, things like that.
[9:39 - 9:56] slide 127:  But it also pertains to replacement of nutritional deficiencies, particularly those that are due to medications, for instance, birth control use long-term, or perhaps some malabsorption from microvilli and villi damage, or just due to poor diet overall.
[9:57 - 10:16] slide 127:  Then we move into re-inoculate and repair. Re-inoculation is all about reseeding the gut with beneficial flora, and repair is all about repairing the damage to 

the mucosal barrier. So those are your mucosal barrier formulas, you know, your slippery elm, marshmallow, glutamine, things like that.
[10:17 - 10:57] slide 127:  Repair can also include more food-based interventions like probiotic-rich foods and bone broth. Now the final R, rebalance. This is where FDN practitioners really shine because we help people evaluate their sleep hygiene, their exercise regimen, There are stress reduction techniques, and that's really all about rebalancing. It's focusing on the entire lifestyle picture, making sure that you're putting strategies in place that allow people to kind of coach up their own vital reserve through the development of healthy habits.
[10:59 - 11:28] slide 127:  Now, this process is never really complete. You're probably always going to be in a state of implementing the five Rs. And additional testing is almost always warranted to identify other HIDDEN stressors. And then you start the process all over again. [slide 128] We're not going to go into any details here. I just have a bullet list that I want to review with you. And maybe there will be a couple of jewels in here that you haven't seen before.
[11:29 - 11:46] slide 128:  So, we want to treat H. pylori first when it's present. And you can consider adding Matula Tea to your protocols particularly when significant virulence factors are there. Now, other infections are treated in the following order, parasites, bacteria, and then fungi and yeast.
[11:47 - 11:58] slide 128:  And most parasites require a 60-day treatment, except for blasto. Blasto hominis will always take a minimum of 90 days to eradicate, but it can take up to 12 months.
[11:59 - 12:12] slide 128:  Now, when bacteria are the primary infection, you want to treat for 60 days. When it's secondary, you treat the bacteria for 30 days. And when yeast and fungi are the primary infection, definitely treat for 60 days.
[12:13 - 12:35] slide 128:  And when it's the secondary or tertiary infection, treat for 40 days. When parasitic worms are present, you can add food-grade diatomaceous earth to your typical parasite protocol. When you do that, you want to start with one teaspoon a day and then titrate up slowly to maybe one to two tablespoons daily.

[12:36 - 13:06] slide 128:  You can also have your clients add diatomaceous earth to their pet food as well as perhaps spread it over the yard areas where pets defecate. But be very careful because you don't want to inhale this stuff. It can damage the lining of the lungs. So, when your clients take it, they need to mix it in water. And when they put it in their dog's food, or their cat's food, make sure that they put a little water in the food too and mix it up so that nothing gets airborne.
[13:07 - 13:39] slide 128:  Now, cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus, those levels might decline after other infections are eliminated. So even when they show up elevated, you may not have to do any antiviral protocols. It really depends if that person also has a couple of parasites and a lot of elevated opportunistic bacteria, deal with those things first. Then when you retest, if those viral loads are still elevated, okay, well then that's a clue that there might be some chronic viral issues going on.
[13:40 - 13:52] slide 128:  But nine times out of ten, what I find is that if I deal with the parasites and the bacteria and the yeast, the viral load just kind of goes back down and it remains dormant.
[13:53 - 14:33] slide 128:  C. diff toxins A and B, I'm not going to get into how to go about doing a C. diff protocol because I really want you guys to take advantage of the clinical advising sessions that are included in the medical director fee that you pay. When you start running the GI map, I absolutely recommend 100% of the time, you schedule that clinical advising session. Even if you think you know exactly what you want to do and you have a firm handle of everything that's going on, I guarantee you, you will come out of the clinical advising session with at least one or two things that are aha moments for you.
[14:34 - 15:12] slide 128:  And that's the way you kind of learn how to use all of these medical director tests. You increase your knowledge base and you can ultimately provide better value for your clients. Also, if you do happen to know everything about the GI map result and you don't need any help, I still suggest that you take advantage of the clinical advising session. You've paid for that time, and you can use that time however you want to. So, if you have other questions that you want to ask about that case in particular, or you have just some random, you know, out-of-the-box questions that you want to

[15:12 - 15:15] slide 128:  bounce around with someone, use that time for whatever you need.
[15:17 - 15:30] slide 129: Absolutely, Whitney. Thank you for that. Those medical director program consults are free, and you get one with each of the medical director program kits that you order.
[15:31 - 15:59] slide 129:  And so, take advantage of those like Whitney suggests. Now, the most important thing there is to consider when it comes to any lab test, especially when you start talking about protocols, is whose lab test results are these? That's what determines what a lab even means. You can't even explain a lab if you don't know whose test results it belongs to, because that's our way of thinking.
[16:00 - 16:17] slide 129:  Someone else might say, oh, that means this and that means that. And they could be generally correct, but if they don't have a person that they're correlating it with, then they're just not doing FDN. We correlate every single marker, if possible.
[16:18 - 16:42] slide 129:  And some don't mean much because, you know, there is no correlation. But for the ones that we are going to take any action upon, hell yeah, we're going to definitely correlate, right? So, clients with health complaints usually have less than optimum or poor lab test results. There’s something out of range, which highly correlates with their history and or complaints, usually both.
[16:43 - 17:22] slide 129:  And as healing opportunities are identified, The D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success Protocol will flow naturally and address each cell tissue organ system simultaneously. Therefore, that out-of-range marker should move in the right direction. Now, that's all you can really hope for, you know, with the D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success Program is, wow, let's get that moving in a different direction than the way it's going now. And it's amazing what happens to people, how their health turns around when that occurs. And the process of education and support that we give our clients using that lab-guided D.R.E.S.S. protocol,
[17:22 - 17:48] slide 129:  plus, observation, accountability, course correction, and appropriate retesting and follow-up labs, or there are some deeper dive labs for HIDDEN stressors, eventually reveals and heals the underlying cause. Exactly the desired 

consequences of adherence to our program or unwanted consequences of not following our recommendations.
[17:49 - 18:06] slide 129:  So, coming up soon is getting rid of offensive foods. Perfect the diet. We're going to eliminate inflammatory, irritating, allergic foods. The MRT is the best pick. IgG can be very handy. We're going to look at infection and infestation.
[18:07 - 18:24] slide 129:  We just looked at infection and infestation. Removing toxic offenders that are there due to poor ecology and also contribute to it. So, you get a poor ecology, and that's why they're there, and then they start contributing to the poor ecology.
[18:25 - 18:48] slide 129:  The more bums that move in, the worse the neighborhood gets, right? So, it's parasites, bacteria, fungi, yeast, biofilms. We haven't looked at those much, but they're all included, and they're behind the scenes much of the time. And most of our protocols break up biofilms in addition to self-treating any parasites or bacteria, what have you.
[18:50 - 19:03] slide 129:  And so, this DSL GI map that we've been looking at is a great initial screening. There's a lot of ways to skin this cat, which we're going to look at. We just have actually two more lessons, and I think we're done. So come back in just a few minutes and finish this module off.











Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos – Slides 130-137
Lesson 11: Other Ways of Stool Testing
[0:00 - 0:18] slide 130:  All right, we're rounding third base here, and we're just about at the end, and I'm excited to tell you that the DSL is a great test, and we looked at how to use the DNA by PCR there to our benefit.
[0:19 - 0:30] slide 130:  It's a very accurate test, and the measurements are really specific, as you can see. We also looked at the Candida suite, which is using antibodies.
[0:31 - 0:46] slide 130:  And that requires a little blood draw. I don't know if I told you it was a finger stick test. So, you prick your finger and you sprinkle some blood on the blotter and you mail it in. It's real inexpensive. It's fast. It's easy. You don't have to poop.
[0:47 - 0:57] slide 130:  And it's looking for things that are, you know, HIDDEN stressors, and it's good. And so, we're just going to look at a couple other little ways and go on to, I think, the last lessons coming up.
[0:59 - 1:09] slide 131:  So, we've run the FDN stress and hormone panel, metabolic wellness profile, mucosal barrier assessment, the GI pathogen screen, and covered all these things.
[1:10 - 1:27] slide 131:  We're also going to run the MRT food sensitivity test and the metabolic typing test before we're done with testing. [slide 132] I just wanted to show a couple different ways. Now, with the DSL, we look at DNA of the whatever it is by what's called 
[1:28 - 2:03] slide 132:  polymerized chain reactions, PCR. We also looked at running antibodies on the Candida suite, and there's lots of antibody tests you can run on stool for all kinds of things. There's also stool culturing, which is petri dish. There's microscopy. There's a special form of microscopy called trichrome staining, You can also do these chemical tests called stool antigen tests. Occult blood is important. We went over a little bit of that. And the comprehensive digestive and stool analysis, which is what doctors run.

[2:04 - 2:44] slide 133:  So, there's antigen testing. In addition to what we've looked at, an antigen is the substance that causes the adaptive immune system to produce antibodies against it. But in this case, you're just looking at the antigens. DNA, we've looked at microscopy, high-powered microscopes. [slide 134] There's also stool culturing. I used to really like this when we could get a good stool culture, cultured in petri dishes to see what kind of fuzz grows. So, they would put a little bit of, you know, liquefied stool in there and see what grows. It's very interesting what grows. Then you have an actual human being who knows how to identify things. See, one
[2:44 - 3:23] slide 134:  of the things the DNA test brags about is no humans involved, just machines. Well, what's good about that? You know, I mean, it's good on one hand, no human error, but it's also, you know, you don't have a person who knows what they're doing or looking at sort of supervising. You know, like on this test here, it's really remarkable what grows and, you know, how valuable this test is. So, on an intestinal microflora stool culture, you basically, though, just get positive. You don't really quantify it to the same level, you would get a positive, you know, plus one, plus two, like light growth, plus three, moderate growth, plus four, abundant growth,
[3:24 - 3:49] slide 134:  as you see in some of those petri dishes there. Now, many species of bacteria can be cultured and help assess gut function and dysbiosis. Their overgrowth can be seen, the infestation, the pathogenic conditions. Escherichia coli is the most frequent finding, but all these others there are found too, all from just culturing. Very cool stuff. And a human being gets to say, hey, look what I found.
[3:50 - 4:05] slide 135:  Now, the microscopy looks for basically eggs and body parts. This one here looks like on sample number three, they found some Blastocystis hominis here, which you can see it on microscopy.
[4:06 - 4:37] slide 135:  Direct microscopic examination is positive evidence. Detected is detected. Detected is positive. Presence of ova and parasites collected over three days covers more of a life cycle of a bug so most stool tests now are just one collection. The egg, larvae, adult bugs, and bug parts again you have a person who knows what they're doing looking on a looking through a microscope so it's kind of cool that these guys these lab rats they get really good at identifying these

[4:37 - 4:49] slide 135:  things And, of course, we know that with blasto, you're not just looking at blasto. You're looking at the whole milieu, the Blastocystis hominis. You're looking at the exudates that come from it.
[4:51 - 5:06] slide 136:  And now there's another form of microscopy, trichrome staining, which is where here it found the Entamoeba coli, where the other forms of testing did not. And they found some yeast as well.
[5:08 - 5:37] slide 137:  So, there's another test to be aware of. It's a small intestinal bacterial overgrowth or SIBO. This is a SIBO breath test kit that you can get through the FDN Medical Director Program. Visit the MDP program on your FDN platform or email orders to orders at afdmp.com. Talk to them about getting a SIBO test if you want. This is where the bacteria is cultured in the stool in the large intestine
[5:38 - 5:55] slide 137:  and can enter the small intestine through the ileocecal valve where they colonize and multiply, forming an overgrowth. That's what SIBO is. It's basically a real bad dysbiosis, but it's invasive species, and they take up a lot of room. So, a lot of our clients have this.
[5:56 - 6:10] slide 137:  I don't do a lot of this testing because I think the testing we do, what we've learned in this course, covers it all. The treatment that you're going to give based on these other things is just a better way of doing it. And that's it for now.










Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos – Slides 138-149
Lesson 12: Final Thoughts
[0:00 - 0:22] slide 138:  All right, we're coming across home plate here. Lesson 12, final thoughts on Module 6, mostly about stool pathogen testing. [slide 139] I'd like to just quickly revisit H. pylori, give you a little bit more background. It's a spiral-shaped gram-negative bacteria that burrows into the stomach lining. It also can creep into the duodenum.
[0:22 - 0:39] slide 139:  and it has some downstream pretty bad effects. It may neutralize the stomach acid surrounding it, compromising hosts' ability to digest food and kill other pathogens coming into the stomach. But interestingly enough, HCL seems to stimulate it.
[0:40 - 0:54] slide 139:  The reason is H. pylori also stimulates gastrin production, and gastrin in the stomach leads to hydrochloric acid production. So, it's kind of an interesting thing about H. pylori.
[0:54 - 1:12] slide 139:  And there are also certain proteins and genes that cause H. pylori to proliferate and magnify its damaging effects. These are called virulence factors. Now, Whitney went through a whole bunch of them as it relates to the DSL test. I just wanted to give you a little bit more on that.
[1:14 - 1:44] slide 140:  So, there are at least two different types of virulence factors. Again, Whitney went over these in the lesson on H. pylori. I just wanted to remind you and emphasize that the adhesion virulence factors can come into play. Certain enzymatic reactions produce adhesion proteins, which help H. pylori attach to the stomach lining. Increasing odds the infection will be persistent long enough to become pathogenic, meaning long enough to be a pathogen. There's a survival process. virulence factors.
[1:45 - 2:03] slide 140:  And then next is the inflammatory virulence factors. And as it does adhere and burrow into the gastric lining, remember that as it burrows, it's going to neutralize the HCL around it. And it's going to also stimulate the gastrin, which is going to make more HCL.

[2:03 - 2:16] slide 140:  And more HCL tends to stimulate it, kind of pisses it off and makes it burrow even more. And so that's why we don't use HCL when we have an H. pylori infection.
[2:16 - 2:26] slide 140:  First, we help the client treat their infection, and then we come back maybe later on with some HCL just for normal digestion.
[2:27 - 3:13] slide 140:  And it gets more interesting from there as the certain coatings. allows the bacteria to change the way the body's signaling pathways talk to each other, telling anti-inflammatory processes to ignore the damage and stay inflamed. That's amazing. Now, these virulence factors can also tell the immune system to ignore the H. pylori, the bug itself, even as it causes cumulative damage to the gastric lining. This damage can culminate in ulcers or even in cancer. So, this is quite a little bug. And again, I'll leave it to you to go back and listen to Whitney as she explains the variance factors, which ones are which. But let me just do one more thing and show you a couple of extra slides.
[3:14 - 3:35] slide 141:  Here's a sample, H. pylori test with nothing to look at. You can see the normal is e3, and this one here is only in e2. So, it's a much lower level and that would be considered not a problem. It's not infectious H. pylori. It's just the presence of a little H. pylori DNA.
[3:35 - 4:03] slide 141:  And that's why you find a lot of physicians still to this day, 20 years later, saying that H. pylori is normal just because a little bit is. And it's kind of like candida. A little bit is normal. So where do you draw the line? Well, one of the lines you could draw is these virulence factors or just higher levels. [slide 142] Such as you see here on this sample result. Remember, normal is in the e3 level. This is at e4.
[4:04 - 4:16] slide 142:  So, it's 10 times higher than normal levels. So, this would be in H. pylori overgrowth or infection without virulence factors.
[4:17 - 4:31] slide 143:  Now here we see a high level of H. pylori. It's 10 times higher. Remember, e3 is If it's e4, you add a zero, so you've got at least 10 times higher. Then you have two virulence factors.
[4:33 - 4:46] slide 143:  For my purposes, it doesn't really matter which ones. You just know that it's an infection plus virulence factors. Well, there are proteins involved that are keeping this thing adhering and more inflammatory and so on.

[4:47 - 5:03] slide 143:  And so that's quite the infection there. And I'm going to go back now to the regularly tuned schedule. But I wanted to give you this little extra primer on H. pylori because it seems to be missing from what we went over in the H. pylori lesson. So, thank you.
[5:04 - 5:19] slide 144:  I want to remind you that we have one of the most amazing benefits of being an FDN is the medical director program. It's how to get your lab work done legally and ethically and make sure the needs of the client are met. You're running the right tests and you know how to interpret them.
[5:20 - 5:54] slide 144:  And you can get some help with the case study too. So, the client is getting the test kits through the FDN Medical Director Program. It's the same principle as the direct-to-consumer labs. When I started doing this, it was just me and maybe one other lab. There's now at least 40 labs that are doing direct-to-consumer, and so this is not out of hand. This is not anything, you know, fishy or funny. You guys are totally privileged to use this FDN Medical Director Program because it's unlike all the rest.
[5:56 - 6:08] slide 144:  It's exclusive to FDNs who are going through the training and who are graduates. The FDN can order for the client, have shipped direct to the client. The FDN will get the test results when they become available from the lab.
[6:08 - 6:27] slide 144:  You know, some labs are two-day turnaround, some are two-week turnaround. You know, you just have to know the labs. And there is an FDN medical director fee for some of the labs, not all of them, but that includes a free consultation when you have to pay a medical director fee.
[6:28 - 6:47] slide 144:  And that's because of the way the lab is set up. They won't do direct-to-consumer and let just anyone run a lab. So, there are some special communications included with some kits as well. So, we do our own customized stuff. We have an amazing staff who takes care of all that for you.
[6:48 - 7:18] slide 144:  You'll learn all about the medical director program in a later module. They're going to walk you through it, and you're going to use it on yourself, and don't worry about that. [slide 145] So, this is one of those special communications. Like if you do a stool test, we're going to give you a letter to send your client pre-written for you if it contains 

some nasty bug. So, whenever you see that, if you get a nasty bug and you get a letter like this along with your test results, like, hey, you better send this to your client,
[7:19 - 7:40] slide 145:  then you definitely want to take advantage of that free appointment with the FDN Clinical Advisor. [slide 146] Some important considerations. Make sure you read instructions thoroughly. Tell your client, read instructions thoroughly, and if you have any questions, Contact the Medical Director Program at orders@afdnp.com.
[7:41 - 7:51] slide 146:  The ladies there will take good care of you. For the most part, avoid the use of both laxatives or enemas to assist bowel movements during the period in which you are collecting your samples.
[7:52 - 8:09] slide 146:  You can use glycerin suppositories. They just make things go a little easier. You do not need to wait two weeks to collect your samples. If you're taking or have taken any prescribed over-the-counter botanical products, that are antibiotic, antiparasitic, antimalarial, antifungal, when using the GI map.
[8:10 - 8:43] slide 146:  So that comes from the fact that there are a lot of stool tests where you have to stop taking things. This one, the GI map, you do not. Orally taking steroids can interfere with the inflammatory markers on the GI map. And if possible, you should wait three or four weeks after the completed regimen to do the test. So, if you're taking prednisone or, you know, cortisone or something like that, you probably want to get off of that or it will invalidate the inflammatory markers. The other markers would still come up
[8:43 - 9:05] slide 146:  fine just that those wouldn't be valid So if you've undergone any radiological examination volume involving barium sulfate, you know that's the challenge it is recommended that you wait at least two weeks after the procedure and after colonoscopy You should wait about a week to do the test. [slide 147]  So where are you in the course? Well, you just finished module six.
[9:06 - 9:46] slide 147:  Module six, it went over a fantastic assortment of new markers in the search for hidden stressors, dysfunctions, and imbalances in a client with metabolic chaos. Now, added to the hormone markers you already learned to identify in Modules 2 and 3, plus the Digestion and Detoxification and Oxidative Stress markers in Listen 4, and the Hyperpermeability and Gut Physiology markers in Module 5, you are now armed with many tools of assessment and impression forming. Go on now to Module 7 and 8 and learn 

even more markers that will finally round out your impression of a person and what the entire constellation of healing opportunities looks like.
[9:46 - 10:05] slide 147:  And keep up the great work. For continuing support, remember to visit the FDN Trainee Facebook group. Attend the Friday study hour every week. It's a nice Zoom call that I'm on every week for you guys. And there's a Friday call where there's the Blog Talk radio call that's separate from the study hour.
[10:06 - 10:19] slide 147:  So, I also do Facebook Live every other week with staff. And look, make sure you open all your emails, follow the prompts given to you in those, plus in any other written materials you get.
[10:19 - 10:35] slide 147:  And if you aren't receiving course progress-specific emails, if you're not getting emails that say, great, you did this, and great, you did that, like tracking you along, then contact support@afdnp.com and tell them. They'll make sure you're getting your proper emails.
[10:37 - 10:48] slide 147:  By now, you would know. It's Module 6 already, but I just put that in there. Now, do not use the chat box on the FDN website to communicate with the staff. That's for the enrollment staff only.
[10:49 - 11:07] slide 147:  They're just talking to non-FDNs around the world and, you know, talking to them about whether FDN is right for them. And you might have actually had some experience with them, and you know they're really cool and friendly and nice people, so you want to reach back out to them, but they're doing their job in another area of the program.
[11:08 - 11:31] slide 147:  You should reach out to your course supervisor at support @afdnp.com, or there's a phone number with an extension right there for you. [slide 148] Practicing FDN is easy as pie. Remember, we just want to know what is a person's main complaints. We want to look at underlying causes. We're going to test, not guess, And always do all five labs.
[11:31 - 11:44] slide 148:  You will learn to put your packages together and do it. The hard way or the easy way. You know, like Matt Dillon used to say when he was arresting a cowboy crook, you're coming with me.

[11:45 - 12:17] slide 148:  Do you want to do it the hard way or the easy way? Learn to do it the easy way. And then once you get the lab reports, you'll get clinical correlation with the test results. Never treat the test results like take this for that. Spend some time. Form your impression. Really think about this person, who they are, where they come from, what their complaints are, what their history is. And obviously from the labs, what are the prominent healing opportunities? What's out of balance and malfunctioning? And maybe you could look deeper sometimes for the underlying causes.
[12:17 - 12:55] slide 148:  But if you've run the five labs, you're going to start with that and refer out for medical oversight. Like if, you know, they have those pathogens on the DSL, the first page, you should think about referring out. If they're real sick and they've got something like salmonella or one of these bad bugs, even H. pylori, think about referring out. Now, typically people don't want to be referred out. They say, no, I want to work with you. I want to do the natural thing. I don't want to take medication. And then, of course, they're right back in our wheelhouse. For your own sake and for the clients in some cases,
[12:56 - 13:17] slide 148:  I've had no trouble telling people, hey, you need to go see your doctor. If they refuse, I might even send them a note saying, hey, I just want to remind you, I did send you to your doctor, and if you choose not to go, that's your business. But I, for the record, have referred you. It's called a CYA referral.
[13:18 - 13:45] slide 148:  Now, results and recommendations sessions are just a ton of fun. You're actually experiencing this, or you will experience this with your mentor, going over your own lab results for the labs that were included in your tuition. And as you apply the general principles of health building found in the D.R.E.S.S. protocol, you'll be able to do it for your clients too. We will together creatively overcome your individual obstacles to healing.
[13:46 - 14:07] slide 148:  And the system that is actually failing will be revealed that's coming up in the protocol section. So, you guys are doing great. Just keep up the good work. [slide 149] Finally, next module, I just want to tell you that it's just as impressive. You're going to learn all about food sensitivity testing. You're going to definitely want to run this on every single person.

[14:08 - 14:29] slide 149:  And keep in mind that you should be following your own personal D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success program, the ultimate opt-in self-care health model. Good job. Go on. Answer all the quiz questions and things and follow up on any emails you're getting from your mentor or from your supervisor, and we'll see you in the next module.






















Module 6: The Part Antigens & Pathogens Play in 
Metabolic Chaos 
Addendum: Walk-Through of the New GI MAP Report
[0:00 - 0:31] intro slide:  Hi, my name is Elizabeth Gaines and I am the course supervisor and lead mentor for the certification course. It is my pleasure to be with you guys today to walk you through the new GI Map report. They have updated it since we recorded the module. The changes are largely cosmetic, but there are some content changes. So, I wanted to record this short video to walk you through all the changes so that you feel prepared and understand everything.
[0:32 - 0:46] GI MAP Report:  Awesome. So, you can see, first of all, that the lines on the test demarcating the different markers have been made much easier to read by the alternating colors. So, it used to be just all one.
[0:47 - 1:07] GI MAP Report:  I'll show you this old report. It used to be just all one color, and it can be hard to sort of go down the lines and see what was what. But because they've now made it alternating colors on the new test report, it's much easier to be sure that you're reading the result for the marker that you think you are as you're going through the report.
[1:09 - 1:20] GI MAP Report:  The second change that they have made to the way the report looks is how they are reporting high and mid and low values.
[1:21 - 1:34] GI MAP Report:  So, it used to be on the report that it would just say high and that the result would be in red and then there would be a high. And that was it.
[1:35 - 1:50] GI MAP Report:  So now you've got the result in red, the high with a little arrow pointing up, and then you've got other markers that are in the mid-range here.
[1:51 - 2:03] GI MAP Report:  So, getting towards lab range, but not over lab range. So, you can see that this Dientamoeba fragilis is in e3 with lab range being in e5.
[2:04 - 2:17] GI MAP Report:  So, they've done you the favor of highlighting that lab result in yellow. For those markers that can be low, you will also see a low arrow pointing down.

[2:18 - 2:34] GI MAP Report:  We don't have an example of that on this report. So then with the intestinal health markers, you will also see that these are now color-coded. There's a color-coded continuum that didn't used to be there.
[2:36 - 2:55] GI MAP Report:  So, you can see here on the intestinal health markers, the values are just coded, but there's no continuum to sort of show you where that might sit along a spectrum of what that result might be.
[2:58 - 3:29] GI MAP Report:  So, coming back here, we have spent a lot of time in conversation with DSL about what the spectrum means. Are they dealing with internal values inside DSL where they're saying, well, we think this is starting to get high, and then we think this is functionally high. And the answer that we've gotten back from them is no, it's a little bit fluid. And the more reports I look at, the more I understand that that is true, that it is a little bit fluid. So, for example,
[3:30 - 3:43] GI MAP Report:  this calprotectin down here being 30 is nearly all the way through the green and trending towards this yellow marker, even though lab range is under 173.
[3:44 - 4:16] GI MAP Report:  So, if we sort of took that literally, we might think that they are telling us that there is a functional range that they're identifying as this sort of moderate calprotectin that starts somewhere shortly after 30 but as far as I can tell, that's not the case. And I've looked at other GI map reports where a calprotectin of 30 is maybe not here, or a calprotectin of 60 is sitting in the same place, or calprotectin of 70. So, I'm
[4:16 - 4:33] GI MAP Report:  taking DSL at their word that it doesn't mean functional ranges and that there really aren't solid internal numbers that they're using to determine where green stops and where yellow begins and where yellow stops and where red begins.
[4:34 - 5:15] GI MAP Report:  So, moving to the commensals, this is really helpful that they've also put this continuum here because you can see at a glance now, rather than the way that it used to be, which I will remind you of here, where when they're high, that's very helpful. But when they are not, you have to sort of go and look and see and say, okay, this Bacteroides was e11 and oh, there's lab range at e11. So, we're getting towards the top of the range there.

[5:17 - 5:28] GI MAP Report:  This bifidobacterium is e11 and lab range is over e7. So, you know, we're good there. Escherichia is e9.
[5:29 - 5:49] GI MAP Report:  Oh, look, lab range is at e9 so, we're starting to trend high there. Those were things that you had to go through and assess line by line on the old report. But here you have a much better visual sense of how things are trending, even if they're not showing up high or low by lab range.
[5:50 - 6:14] GI MAP Report:  So, I can just sort of eyeball this top area of commensals and make a judgment call of, okay, it looks like there are some definitely that are low and some that are trending low, one that is high, some that are trending high. So, I'm looking at a mixed pattern of inflammatory and insufficiency, for example.
[6:15 - 6:28] GI MAP Report:  So those are the cosmetic differences in the way that they are changing reporting. I would also like to point out some organizational changes, which make this a little bit easier to look at.
[6:30 - 6:50] GI MAP Report:  So, you can see on the old report, that this normal bacterial flora category was just sort of called that, normal bacterial flora. And it was broken down into these particular individual bacterial strains and then these larger microbiota families of bacteria.
[6:52 - 7:11] GI MAP Report:  But now they have changed this to be commensal keystone bacteria. So, they are labeling these commensals here as keystone species, which I tend to think of keystone species like the pillars of a community.
[7:12 - 7:23] GI MAP Report:  So, you need to have, in order for your city to function well, you need to have a mayor and you need to have a superintendent of schools and you need to have a chief of police and you need to have somebody in charge of the fire department.
[7:24 - 7:37] GI MAP Report:  And that is what creates order and allows people to move to the city, a.k.a. diversity, and have a healthy functioning place where people can thrive and be happy.
[7:38 - 8:04] GI MAP Report:  But when those keystones are missing, when those pillars of the community are gone, it's a little bit wild west. And you're going to have diverse bacteria move through on food and in water and, you know, whatever we're putting in our mouths 

and decide that they don't want to live there because it isn't safe and there's not organization and they don't think that they can thrive there. So, they just sort of keep it moving.
[8:05 - 8:27] GI MAP Report:  So, to be able to look at these and understand that they are the keystones and then evaluate the keystones which are necessary for the health of the community against those bacterial families that we need to see a lot of quantity of in order to have a healthy functioning gut. So that is a helpful change in reporting.
[8:28 - 8:54] GI MAP Report:  Another helpful change in reporting comes on the opportunistic overgrowth page. You can see on the old report that this page only has two categories under opportunistic. It's got this additional dysbiotic overgrowth bacteria, and it's got potential autoimmune triggers.
[8:54 - 9:33] GI MAP Report:  Now, what was confusing about this way of looking at opportunistic is that it made it seem like none of these things should have been there, but that's not true. Some of these species here on the opportunistic page are actually commensal. They're not keystone, but they're commensal, meaning we should see them there. We just don't want to see them overgrown because that's when they become opportunistic. So, the new GI map report does a much better job of separating this out within categories.
[9:34 - 9:57] GI MAP Report:  So, we can see at the top here, We've got our dysbiotic and overgrowth bacteria. These are the ones we don't want to see. These are the ones that only mean trouble, that shouldn't be there in any capacity. So even if they're present below lab range, they would still be of concern to us.
[9:58 - 10:13] GI MAP Report:  But now we have this new category, commensal overgrowth microbes, meaning that that these are commensal when they're in the right balance, that they do us good when they are in the right balance. And remember that balance is everything for us.
[10:14 - 10:36] GI MAP Report:  We don't want to see these overgrown. That's the point at which they would become dysbiotic. That's the point at which they would become opportunistic and they would stop being good for us. So, we would expect to see the 

commensals there, unlike the category above it, where we would not want to see any of those guys show up in any quantity.
[10:38 - 10:59] GI MAP Report:  Similarly, we have now separated out the inflammatory and autoimmune-related bacteria that we don't want to see there at all versus the ones that are commensal and only become this inflammatory and autoimmune-related bacteria when it is overgrown.
[11:00 - 11:12] GI MAP Report:  So, in this inflammatory category, you can see that there's some Citrobacter for this person under lab range. We would still want to address that because we don't want to see any of these show up.
[11:13 - 11:35] GI MAP Report:  Contrasting that with the commensal category where we would want to see all of these show up, we just don't want to see them show up over lab range. So, this is a way easier way to look at this category to really see at a glance what shouldn't be there at all, and what shouldn't be there in quantities that are considered too high.
[11:36 - 11:55] GI MAP Report:  They become dangerous when they're out of balance. So, these are the fundamental changes in how reporting is going on the GI map and organizational strategies of the GI map report.
[11:56 - 12:08] GI MAP Report:  Now, there are a couple of new markers that I would like to talk you through. So, the first one is going to be here in commensal bacteria.
[12:09 - 12:21] GI MAP Report:  They have dropped Clostridia and they have replaced it with Rosburia. So Rosburia is now considered one of these keystone bacteria.
[12:22 - 12:43] GI MAP Report:  And I think part of the reason that they dropped Clostridia is because when they decided that these would be keystones, Clostridia is not a keystone. It is a commensal, but it's not a keystone. So, they dropped it, and then they added one that was a keystone, Rosburia. Now, we're going to talk about that one in more detail in a moment.
[12:44 - 13:24] GI MAP Report:  I just want to also introduce the other new marker here in the intestinal health markers, in the immune category, we now have an Eosinophil activation protein marker, which is a completely new marker. So, let's talk about what these new markers are. So, the first is that commensal keystone bacteria, Rosburia, the one that 

replaced Clostridia on the GI map. Why is Rosburia important? It is a gram-positive anaerobic bacteria, and it has this curved rod shape, as you can see in the picture.
[13:25 - 13:37] GI MAP Report:  They are part of commensal flora, as we discussed, and they are a keystone, meaning that they are one of the pillars of the community, which means that the gut is a happy place for diversity to come and move in and thrive.
[13:39 - 14:16] GI MAP Report:  They break down the sugars and complex carbohydrates of plant fibers, And in doing so, they're releasing enzymes that are chewing on these plant fibers. And in doing so, they are producing short-chain fatty acids, one of which is butyrate. Butyrate is extremely important for the healthy functioning of a gut. It helps us with colon motility, with gut immunity, with gut acidity, and with maintaining an anti-inflammatory state in the gut. This is one reason why it's very important to eat your plants.
[14:17 - 14:30] GI MAP Report:  No matter what type of metabolic type you are, eating foods that come from plant sources is incredibly important for gut health, and butyrate is only one reason why.
[14:32 - 15:03] GI MAP Report:  So, then the second new marker is this Eosinophil activation protein. So, Eosinophils are white blood cells. Sometimes you see when you get your blood work back that they've measured out what was a neutrophil and what was an Eosinophil and what was a basophil and what was other types of immune cells. So, we're looking here only at Eosinophils.
[15:04 - 15:22] GI MAP Report:  They are an immune cell which has these granules of poison inside of them, which you can see in this picture. They've got these kind of granules of poison.
[15:23 - 15:44] GI MAP Report:  And they shoot out these granules of poison when they sense tissue damage, viral, or bacterial pathogens. So, they are part of that immune response. So, your secretory IgA has identified a problem and the Eosinophils come in to help neutralize that problem.
[15:46 - 16:16] GI MAP Report:  So, you can see here that there are many ways in which these Eosinophils are shooting out these granules. A lot of different cytotoxins and other 

mediators that really help to shut down these stimuli that come from tissue injury, viral and bacterial infections, or allergens and tumors.
[16:17 - 16:34] GI MAP Report:  So, I think of this a little bit like bullets in a gun. So, when the immune system says, hey, here's something that shouldn't be here, the Eosinophil comes in and just annihilates it by shooting out these granules called proteins.
[16:35 - 17:13] GI MAP Report:  So, what we are looking at on the test in particular is this one down here called the Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin, or the EDN. And you can see on the report that right under Eosinophil activation protein, it says Eosinophil protein X, EPX, and then it says EDN, which means we're looking at the Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin under this cytotoxic list of products that the Eosinophils have at their disposal to go destroy things that are threatening the immune system and threatening the sanctity of the gut.
[17:14 - 17:47] GI MAP Report:  So, if Eosinophil activation protein is trending high or is high, then we know that there is a large immune burden, that these Eosinophils are being overtaxed and that they're shooting out these granules of proteins willy-nilly and that the immune system is really under attack. So, we would, of course, want to clinically correlate that with what the client is going through, and we would want to look at other immune markers to see if they're telling us that same story. So, if SIgA, for example, is suppressed,
[17:48 - 17:59] GI MAP Report:  then we might assume that Eosinophil activation is also going to be suppressed. So it could be that if the immune system were fully functioning, we'd see more of it.
[18:00 - 18:30] GI MAP Report:  But if the immune system is within normal limits or high even, we might see a lot of Eosinophil activation activity. And that would just be another confirmation that the immune system is carrying a heavy burden. Just like with histamine on the mucosal barrier assessment, if histamine is high, it's correlating with zonulin, correlating with leaky gut, then we know that the immune system is carrying a heavy burden.
[18:31 - 19:06] GI MAP Report:  So, we'd want to check all these markers out, see how they're talking to each other to assess this one marker because we can't tell anything from one marker. But the other thing to point out here is that it is a neurotoxin. So, when we release this Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin in small quantities, it's a non-issue for our bodies. 

But when we've got an immune system under heavy burden, being attacked from all sides, and these Eosinophil are highly excited and throwing out neurotoxin, it does in fact
[19:07 - 19:22] GI MAP Report:  affect our brain. It changes the way that the cells are shaped in our brains. It changes the way that signaling goes in our brains. And it can affect the nervous system as a whole, not just brain function.
[19:23 - 19:54] GI MAP Report:  So, it's an interesting marker that could correlate if it's high with fatigue, with brain fog, with trouble concentrating, with some nervous system disorders like shaky limbs or restless leg, things like that, might actually be associated with this neurotoxic activity that's coming from an immune system that's overtaxed and having to rely too heavily on the Eosinophil activation protein.
[19:56 - 20:05] GI MAP Report:  So that is the new GI map. I hope that this walkthrough has been helpful. And as always, let us know if you have any questions.