# M10+1PP
*Converted from: M10+1PP.pdf*

---

## Page 1

Module 10 11/4/2025
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition ®
FDN Certification Course
Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
Module 10
The “R” for Rest in the FDN
D.R.E.S.S. For Health Success®
Program
Lesson 1: Rest, Recovery, Sleep
and Good Health
1
1

## Page 2

Module 10 11/4/2025
R for Rest
Humans are diurnal and are meant to sleep through the night. Poor sleep quality directly
contributes to Metabolic Chaos® (has serious consequences on metabolism and health)
You might be:
 eating the perfect diet for you,
 getting adequate exercise,
 managing stress,
 taking all the right supplements,
But if you’re not getting enough sleep, much good will
be cancelled out
Sleep is a huge priority. H.I.D.D.E.N. stressors
and dysfunction must be properly investigated.
2
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
2
2

## Page 3

Module 10 11/4/2025
The Importance of Sleep
Sleep is an anabolic process (builds you up) vs. catabolic.
Human Growth Hormone (HGH) and other hormones are involved in
rest and recovery, repairing organs, bones, and muscle tissue.
The immune system more activated to
bring pathogens into check and restore
microbial balance
3
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
3
3

## Page 4

Module 10 11/4/2025
The Importance of Sleep
Memory and learning are consolidated as the brain
processes memories and ability to solve problems.
Sleep helps the brain commit new information to memory
by making new neuronal connections (neuroplasticity)
Normal body cycles are restored
Free radicals are removed from the brain
Synapses, which have been overwhelmed and stimulated
during the day, are reset, resulting in our waking up feeling
refreshed and rejuvenated
4
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
4
4

## Page 5

Module 10 11/4/2025
"DRESS" works Because of Sound Principles…
We don’t diagnose or treat anything specifically
We make observations about Metabolic Chaos® and remove as
many contributors and stressors as possible, “unveiling” the basic
systems that are actually failing
We nurture and restore function and support weak links that are a
part of Metabolic Chaos®, so clients invariably “get better”
“General principles of health building
outperforms specific treatments” ~ Reed
5
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
5
5

## Page 6

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Treats Everything Non-specifically
A full 8 hours sleep per night
Enhances memory and mental clarity
Boosts mood and the ability to moderate emotions
Increases the ability to handle stress
Improves overall energy and digestive health
Improves muscle recovery and athletic performance
Improves and maintains immune function
A good night’s sleep can straighten out its share of Metabolic Chaos®
Not everyone needs the same amount of sleep, but consistently
sleeping less than 6.5 hours or more than 9 hours per day has been
associated with greater mortality and risk of disease
6
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
6
6

## Page 7

Module 10 11/4/2025
Stages of Sleep
When we sleep, we cycle between NREMsleep and REMsleep.
Most adults cycle through 4 or 5 sleep cycles per night.
REM (rapid eye movement) sleep
Totals 20%–25% of sleep time in adults (50% in infants)
Begins 1–2 hours after NREM sleep begins
Occurs about every 90 minutes (ultradian rhythm), with
each REM period getting longer
The first may last 5–10 minutes and the final one 20–50
minutes (if not woken by an alarm clock)
NREM (non-rapid eye movement) sleep
Accounts for 75%–80% of sleep time in adults (50% in infants)
Three stages (N1–N3) from light to deep sleep
7
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
7
7

## Page 8

Module 10 11/4/2025
What Happens During REM Sleep?
EEG pattern is similar to the normal awake pattern (the brain is very active)
Parasympathetic activity is increased, and sympathetic activity is variable
Rapid eye movements
Loss of temperature regulation
Variability in heart rate and blood pressure
Breathing irregular, and shallow
Release of steroids, Blood flow to the brain increases
Most dreaming occurs (although nightmares occur during deep N3 sleep)
The brain analyzes (or processes and forgets) the day’s events
Skeletal muscles (except those of the eyes and diaphragm) are actively inhibited and
go limp (prevents us from acting out our dreams)
8
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
8
8

## Page 9

Module 10 11/4/2025
What Happens During NREM Sleep?
Sympathetic activity is decreased, and parasympathetic activity is increased,
reducing motor activity
Blood flow to the brain decreases
Secretion of cortisol, aldosterone, epinephrine and norepinephrine decreases
Serotonin is released (maintains the wellbeing of the
brain)
Grogginess, impaired motor activity, and the feeling
of wanting to return to sleep that sometimes occurs
on awakening is thought to occur when waking from
deep N3 rather than from light sleep or REM sleep.
9
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
9
9

## Page 10

Module 10 11/4/2025
What Happens During NREM Sleep?
N1(Transition)
EEG shows alpha waves
Relaxation begins
No real rest value
Can be easily awakened by noise or other disturbances
N2 (Light Sleep)
EEG shows irregular waves
Body temperature drops, breathing and heart rate are regular
More difficult to awaken
N3(Deep Sleep)
EEG shows theta and delta waves (slow-wave)
Breathing slows and muscles relax
Heart rate decreases up to 30 beats per minute
Blood pressure decreases
Basal metabolic rate falls by 10%–15%
Slow brain waves
Growth hormone is released (repairs organ and muscle tissue)
Energy is restored
Hard to awaken
10
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
10
10

## Page 11

Module 10 11/4/2025
Lack of Sleep Stages
Lack of N3 sleep interferes with restoration. Persistent lack of REM sleep has
been associated with negative psychological outcomes
Irritability
Anxiety
Depression
Personality disorders
Increased appetite
11
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
11
11

## Page 12

Module 10 11/4/2025
Effects of Sleep Deprivation
Fewer than 6 hours of sleep contributes to Metabolic Chaos®
Impairs tissue growth and repair
Decreases motor performance
Impairs the immune system
Increases inflammation
Alters glucose metabolism
Worsens insulin resistance
Increases appetite → obesity
Impairs memory and concentration
Impairs the generation of nerve cells → cognitive decline
Impairs mood and mental health → depression and anxiety
Associated with increased risk taking
Associated with digestive issues, obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease
All these release stress hormones in the body
12
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
12
12

## Page 13

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Debt
“Failure to achieve an appropriate amount of sleep leads to chronic sleep deficiency,
or the accumulation of a ‘sleep debt’. Like many monetary contracts, however, there
are strict rules on when this sleep debt must be repaid, and it cannot be put off
indefinitely without incurring large penalties, in this case on one’s health.
Unlike most monetary contracts, however, sleep deficiency has to be repaid each day
and sleeping in at weekends does not seem to be sufficient to repay a week’s worth of
bad sleep. Unfortunately, sleep credits are very difficult to obtain… Simply put, regular
(daily), substantial sleep deposits are needed to maintain a healthy balance in the
sleep bank”1
13
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
13
13

## Page 14

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Debt, con’t
“… After about 2 weeks with fewer than 6 hours of sleep per night, performance levels fall to the
same level as someone with 24 hours of acute sleep deprivation; with 4 hours in bed per night,
it takes only 7 days to reach that level, and after 2 weeks, performance is equivalent to 2–3 days
without sleep…
…we cannot accurately judge how impaired we are when sleep deprived, rather like when we
think we can be great drivers after drinking too much. If acute and chronic sleep deprivation
are combined, for example -- by failing to get enough recovery sleep after staying up all night
on repeated occasions, the harmful effects on performance are multiplied up to 10-times…
… Just like going to the gym or following a diet plan, it takes a concerted effort every day to get
enough sleep and avoid the health and safety effects of acute and chronic sleep deprivation.”2
14
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
14
14

## Page 15

Module 10 11/4/2025
Circadian Rhythm
The circadian rhythm is the body’s 24-hour cycle that
governs the timing of many of its behavioral,
physiological, and metabolic functions:
Sleep–wake cycle
Hormone release (e.g. cortisol, melatonin, and
growth hormone)
Body temperature
Glucose and insulin levels
Cardiac and lung function
And more
Source: University of Utah. Retrieved from http://learn
.genetics.utah.edu/content/inheritance/clockgenes
15
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
15
15

## Page 16

Module 10 11/4/2025
Hormone Fluctuations
Many hormones are influenced by the circadian system, sleep, or a combination of both.
Melatonin
Cortisol
Human Growth Hormone (HGH)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Prolactin – resembles growth hormone cycle
Aldosterone – peaks in afternoon; declines in evening
Testosterone – low in afternoon; high at night
16
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
16
16

## Page 17

Module 10 11/4/2025
Melatonin
Melatonin (from the pineal gland)
Released into the blood and cerebrospinal fluid – interacts with the
hypothalamus to induce drowsiness and therefore the onset of sleep
Production (in pineal gland) is regulated by light exposure - Increases
after sundown and during the night during normal
light–dark cycle.
As the length of daylight varies with season,
so does the cycle of melatonin. Nighttime
light exposure suppresses production.
17
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
17
17

## Page 18

Module 10 11/4/2025
Melatonin
Melatonin (from the gut)
Maintains baseline levels which we return to during the day.
Levels are unaffected by whether or not sleep
occurs -- are suppressed by cortisol
Increases immune cytokine function
Increases killer t-cells, helps protect against
infection.
Acts as an antioxidant
Melatonin synthesized from tryptophan, a dietary
amino acid -- can be addressed by eating more
foods containing tryptophan such as
poultry, seafood, and legumes
18
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
18
18

## Page 19

Module 10 11/4/2025
Cortisol
Fluctuates with the circadian rhythm
Rises shortly before we usually awake (assists in elevating blood glucose levels by
breakdown of proteins)
Rises more once we wake up – Cortisol Awakening Response (CAR), largely
based on perceived stress
Followed by a decline over the day
Lowest levels are around the middle of the night so as to
maintain sleep
Minor fluctuations occur overnight to cycle between
various sleep stages
Levels are not particularly affected by whether asleep or awake,
although… waking from sleep causes a small additional elevation.
19
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
19
19

## Page 20

Module 10 11/4/2025
Cortisol and Sleep Problems
Nighttime cortisol elevations due to loss of sleep the night before3 or stress (external or hidden)
Increases sympathetic nervous system activity, which increases alertness and makes sleep difficult.
Depresses melatoninsecretion, which can delay the sleep–wake cycle.
Cortisol elevations may hold over to the morning (see elevated morning cortisol on the FiQ Stress
and Hormone Profile.
HPA axis dysfunction leads to low cortisol levels. Because cortisol plays a role in regulating blood
glucose levels, lower than normal nighttime cortisol does not sustain blood glucose at an adequate level.
Drops in blood glucose disrupt sleep by triggering waking during the night.
Many people awaken between 2 and 3 am.
In Chinese medicine, this is “liver time,” which may be a useful clue
20
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
20
20

## Page 21

Module 10 11/4/2025
Human Growth Hormone Fluctuations
Growth Hormone (HGH) is very much sleep-dependent with little influence from circadian system
Secreted primarily during deep -- N3 -- sleep
Very low levels under conditions of sleep deprivation
Enables the maintenance of growth and restorative processes
Growth hormone is an anabolic hormone
Stimulates tissue regeneration, liver generation,
muscle growth, breakdown of fat stores
Involved in blood sugar regulation
HGH has been called the
“anti-aging hormone”
21
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
21
21

## Page 22

Module 10 11/4/2025
TSH Fluctuations
TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) levels are very strongly sleep-dependent, with little
influence of the circadian system.
Going without sleep elevates TSH
Has a small peak close to sleep onset under normal conditions
When measured without sleep, a robust
circadian rhythm in TSH is revealed --
with a night-time peak that is usually
suppressed by sleep at night.4
22
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
22
22

## Page 23

Module 10 11/4/2025
Stress and Sleep
Stress can be both a cause and a result of sleep loss.
The natural rhythms of hormone secretion can be altered by the stress response, affecting sleep.
Stress can result in surges or dips in hormone secretion that don’t match
the regular circadian rhythm or sleep–wake patterns.
Stress response increases cortisol production and
sympathetic nervous system activity, increasing
alertness and making falling asleep difficult.
Lack of sleep increases production of stress hormones
Elevated cortisol affects sleep directly, raises blood sugar
Also lowers melatonin, affecting ability to fall and stay asleep
23
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
23
23

## Page 24

Module 10 11/4/2025
Circadian Clocks in Other Organs
Nearly all organs are capable of generating their own circadian rhythms in addition
to those generated by the master clock in the brain.5
Proper synchronization between these internal rhythms (ultradian rhythms) is required
for maintaining proper metabolic function and avoiding Metabolic Chaos®
For example, the circadian clocks in the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, intestine, liver,
kidney, and bladder must be synchronized together in order for the digestive, elimination,
and detoxification processes to work properly
These rhythms are sensitive to non-light time cues such as when you eat
Inconsistent meal times (not only experienced by shift-workers) therefore results in
poor digestive, elimination, and detoxification function
24
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
24
24

## Page 25

Module 10 11/4/2025
Factors Affecting Sleep Cycles
Exposure to light before and during sleep
Low blood sugar or other hidden stressors elevate cortisol, which promotes awakening
Exposure to EMFs or toxins in the bedroom
Cordless phones, cell phones, and wireless devices
Electric blankets, Unnatural mattress materials
Metal frames and bedsprings can interfere with regular sleep
Stress, any stress, including poor diet
Alcohol, sleeping pills, other medications suppress REM sleep
Tranquilizers like Valium suppress deep N3 sleep
Air travel and shift-work
Alarm clocks, nagging
25
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
25
25

## Page 26

Module 10 11/4/2025
How Light Exposure Impacts Sleep
Impacts the circadian rhythm by disturbing the timing of the circadian clock6
Late evening light exposure shifts the circadian clock to a later time (delay)
Early morning light exposure shifts the clock to an earlier time (advance)
Reduces homeostatic sleep drive by improving
subjective and objective measures of alertness
Suppresses pineal melatonin production
Increasesnighttime heart rate and
core temperature levels
Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN)
26
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
26
26

## Page 27

Module 10 11/4/2025
Caffeine and Sleep
Due to a genetic variation in the liver enzyme that breaks down caffeine, some
people eliminate caffeine quickly, and others slowly.
Caffeine blocks the effects of adenosine which builds up during wakefulness.7
Caffeine increases blood pressure, heart rate, and
body temperature.7
Even if consumed in the morning, sleep can be affected:7
Longer sleep latency
Reduces sleep duration
Suppresses deep (N3) sleep
27
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
27
27

## Page 28

Module 10 11/4/2025
Alcohol and Sleep
During periods of heavy drinking, and up to 2 years after stopping, there is reduced
deep (N3) sleep, suppressed REM sleep, fragmented sleep during the second half of
the night, and shortened overall sleep duration.
Rates of insomnia in alcoholics are reported to be
between 40% and 70%.
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction.
Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.99.
28
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
28
28

## Page 29

Module 10 11/4/2025
Exercise and Sleep
Regular exercise promotes
improvement in sleep quality.8
Exercise early in the day.
Lengthy cardio or intense exercise can
increase cortisol levels, so don’t overdo
it too late in the day.
29
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
29
29

## Page 30

Module 10 11/4/2025
Daylight Saving Time (DST)
The shift to DST in spring causes the loss of an hour’s sleep, and this coincides with a
near 20% increase in motor vehicle accidents the Monday morning after the change.
The risk of a heart attack goes up by 5% in the first 3 weeks of DST, but does not happen
when the clocks ‘fall back’ in the fall.9
30
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
30
30

## Page 31

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep and Immunity
Abnormalities in the circadian pattern of cortisol secretion can alter immune system function.
Has been associated with HIV/AIDS, breast cancer, and early mortality10
Melatonin production by the pineal gland can be blocked by light or some medicines.
Immune response is repressed
Melatonin supplementation can reverse these
effects11
Stress-induced sleep loss directly inhibits innate immune
responses by reducing numbers of natural killer cells12
31
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
31
31

## Page 32

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Deprivation and Appetite
The ratio of the hormones leptin and ghrelin helps to regulate our appetite.
Leptin
The ‘satiety’ hormone primarily made in large fat cells – high levels reduce our appetite
A baseline is released into the blood stream, signaling the hypothalamus about the amount
of stored fat in the body. More Leptin is stimulated by eating, helping us to know when we
have had enough to eat
Levels are generally higher at night to ensure that we eat at the right time of day
Ghrelin
The ‘hunger’ hormone secreted by stomach – high levels stimulate our appetite
Levels increase with increasing time between meals
After a meal, leptin levels are high and ghrelin levels are low, which reduces our appetite.
Sleep deprivation, particularly of deep N3 sleep, decreases the levels of leptin and
increases production of ghrelin, which increases appetite and overeating.
32
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
32
32

## Page 33

Module 10 11/4/2025
Impact of Shiftwork
During first few days of shiftwork, no real change in melatonin and cortisol secretion patterns,
but over time melatonin and cortisol secretion decreases.13,14
It can take 2 weeks to reset the new circadian rhythm15by which time the shift-worker may have
been rotated to a different shift and therefore either partially adapts or does not adapt at all.
Trying to sleep at the wrong circadian phase reduces sleep duration, alters the type and quality
of sleep, and affects hormone levels and metabolism.16
A meal eaten at 1:30 am will result in higher blood levels of glucose, insulin, and fats for several
hours after the meal compared with eating the same meal at 1:30 pm
Shift-workers experience sleep problems, fatigue, poor performance, plus
memory, intestinal problems, and greater risk of accidents and injuries, and
have increased long-term risk of chronic disease
33
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
33
33

## Page 34

Module 10 11/4/2025
Managing Shift Work
Shift duration should be minimized, with night shifts as short as possible.
The number of consecutive night shifts should be minimized, and rotating shifts should cycle in a
delay direction (i.e. from morning, to evening, to night shifts).
As much time off as possible should be given after night shifts
to maximize recovery sleep.
Shift-workers should get home and sleep as soon as possible
after the shift ends -- not watch TV or answer email.
Shift-workers should use an eye-mask and earplugs and switch
off the telephone when sleeping.
Caffeine consumption should stop at least 5 hours before
the planned sleep time
34
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
34
34

## Page 35

Module 10 11/4/2025
Jetlag
Jetlag has the same effect as shift-work. Common symptoms include insomnia, fatigue,
impaired cognition, and gastrointestinal problems.
As with shift-work, the circadian system cannot adapt to the rapid change in light–dark
exposure, and the symptoms persist until the circadian system has adapted to the new
destination, which takes approximately 1 day per time zone.
Adaptation to a new time zone can be accelerated by using light exposure (natural or indoor) and
light avoidance using dark sunglasses or napping.
Calculating when to seek light or avoid light depends on the number of time zones
crossed and the direction of travel.
Can be calculated online at www.jetlagrooster.com
35
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
35
35

## Page 36

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep and Blood Sugar Regulation
Restricting sleep to only 5 hours per night for 1 week significantly reduces insulin
sensitivity (increases insulin resistance)16
The ability of glucose to regulate its own levels independent of insulin also becomes
impaired (decreased glucose tolerance).17
Refer to D_Diet Lessons for strategies
on balancing blood sugar levels:
36
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
36
36

## Page 37

Module 10 11/4/2025
Establishing Proper Sleep Cycles
Most people require 7–8 hours sleep per night. Sticking to a sleep schedule matching
our natural circadian rhythm reinforces a sleep–wake cycle.
Create a calming bedtime routine -- practicing relaxation, meditation, breathing exercises
Each hour of sleep before midnight is worth 2 hours of sleep after midnight,
to rebuild and detoxify the body and rest the adrenal glands
Eat a small snack containing protein, low-glycemic carbohydrates
and healthy fat prevents drop in blood sugar levels during
the night. Taking a multi-mineral supplement before
bedtime helps in many cases to relax the body
Avoid sugar and alcohol for first 90 days
37
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
37
37

## Page 38

Module 10 11/4/2025
Insomnia
Can be sleep-onsetinsomnia (difficulty falling asleep) or sleep maintenance insomnia
(frequent, early awakening)
Any factor that prevents the body and mind from relaxing is a stressor and therefore raises adrenaline and
cortisol, or blocks melatonin or serotonin production
 Psychological factors --depression, anxiety, tension, emotional arousal, fear of insomnia
 Physical stress --pain or discomfort
 Recreational drugs --cannabis H.I.D.D.E.N. stressors
must be properly
 Medicinal drugs --beta-blockers, oral contraceptives, thyroid meds
investigated
 Stimulants --alcohol, caffeine, tea, chocolate, guarana
 Environmental factors --change in environment, disruptive environment,
light exposure before or during sleep, excitement before sleep
 Health conditions --sleep apnea, parasomnia, twitching, hypoglycemia
Anyone having an irregular sleep–wake schedule:
38
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
38
38

## Page 39

Module 10 11/4/2025
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
OSA is repeated partial or complete closing of the airway (an apnea) during sleep, cutting off the
air supply and causing the person to start to suffocate and then wake up, often with a gasp.
Such regular sleep disruption prevents getting into the deep (N3) sleep
that restores alertness, resulting in fatigue and cognitive problems.
OSA is highly prevalent in middle-aged, overweight clients,
particularly men and postmenopausal women.
Obesity and large neck size are risk factors, as
the increased fat around the neck compresses
the airway when lying down
39
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
39
39

## Page 40

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep During Pregnancy
On average, sleep duration increases by 1 hour each night during first trimester (possibly due to the
rapid rise in progesterone secretion which increases sleepiness and body temperature).
Sleep disruption and fatigue are also high. N3 sleep and REM sleep may reduce slightly
towards the end of pregnancy.
Common symptoms during pregnancy that can disrupt sleep:
 Physical discomfort and fetal activity
 Nocturia (excessive urination at night)
 Acid reflux, Insomnia, Excessive sleepiness
 Snoring and shortness of breath -- possibly due to the effects of progesterone on respiration
 Leg cramps and restless legs syndrome
Postpartum depression may be associated with greater sleep disruption
40
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
40
40

## Page 41

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Babies
In the first few weeks of life, there is a seemingly random sleep–wake pattern, totaling up to 16 hours
sleep over the day and night. However, the homeostatic control of sleep is apparent even in babies
Circadian rhythm
The circadian clock begins to generate non-24-hour sleep–wake rhythms but cannot yet be
synchronized to the 24-hour light–dark cycle.
After 2–6 months, a distinct 24-hour cycle emerges, with a major nighttime sleep episode
and shorter naps in the daytime, which stabilizes at 6–12 months of age.
Melatonin is passed in breast milk, and if breast-fed at night (rather than pumped in the day
and given at night), this might provide a synchronizing time cue in early life.
NREM–REM cycle
At 2 weeks of age, half of the sleep episode consists of REM sleep.
By 6 months of age, REM sleep reduces to about one-third.
REM sleep is necessary for consolidating the new information that babies need to learn and memorize
41
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
41
41

## Page 42

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Babies, cont’d
Sleep plays a key role in brain maturation, and therefore getting adequate sleep is vitally important
for cognitive development.
To encourage sleep and help synchronize the biological clock, keep the
sleep environment as dark as possible;
Use blackout curtains
Avoid night-lights or use the dimmest red light possible
and limit the time it is on.
Keep the room quiet
Avoid playing tunes to soothe the baby to sleep, or
switch them off as soon as sleep begins.
As the baby gets older, develop a stable schedule
with a strong 24-hour pattern of light days and dark nights.
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.60.
42
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
42
42

## Page 43

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Children
Sleep is vitally important for the health and development of children.
To help synchronize the circadian clock and maintain a more regular sleep–wake pattern, bedtime rituals:
Should occur in as dim a light as possible (removed when asleep)
Use of dim, incandescent or red light sources are preferable, and the new
bright ‘bluer’ LED-type of light should be avoided in the bedroom.
Children should never consume caffeine.
Sleep deprivation can cause over-activation.
Over-tired children act up and have temper tantrums, and are moody,
irritable, and sometimes aggressive.
Chronic sleep deficiency is likely to exacerbate problem behaviors such as
ADHD(attention deficit hyperactivity disorder).
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp. 62–63.
43
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
43
43

## Page 44

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Adolescents
Teenagers require considerably more sleep than younger children or adults. Starting around puberty
and into their early 20s, adolescents need about 9.2 hours of sleep each night, compared with the
7.5–8.0 hours that adults need.18
Adolescents experience a delayin their sleep and circadian rhythms,
with a 2–3 hour change in the timing of their circadian clock over their
teenage years, correlating closely with pubertal development.
In addition, older teenagers tend to have reduced N3 sleep and have
a slower rate of homeostatic sleep drive build-up during the day.19
Exposure to light in the evening delays melatonin secretion for those who are in middle or late puberty
(but not for prepubertal subjects).18
44
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
44
44

## Page 45

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Adolescents, cont’d
Having to get up for school results in a dramatic curtailing of their sleep 5 days a week, and when they try and
sleep according to their natural cycle at weekends, they are often harangued for being lazy and made to get up.
“Having teenagers get up for school at 7 a.m. is like asking adults to wake at 4 a.m., and so it is not surprising that
teenagers are unresponsive and irritated. Modest delays in school start times can have a major effect on
academic performance and behavior…
Protecting time for sleep, particularly at weekends, is important, as is monitoring of late-evening extracurricular
activities, caffeine use, and other factors that reduce sleep. While it is difficult for the delay to be entirely
corrected, gradually advancing bedtimes, and reducing activities and light exposure prior to bed may help
shift bedtimes earlier and increase sleep opportunities.”
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.65.
45
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
45
45

## Page 46

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in Middle Age
The timing of the circadian clock gradually advances as we age making us more morning-type.
Sleep duration reduces, including the proportion of N3 sleep and REM sleep.
This reduction in the homeostatic regulation of sleep makes is harder to recover from sleep
deprivation or adapt to working split shifts.
Gender differences in sleep and sleep perception become
more pronounced in middle age, with women generally
having more complaints about sleep than men, despite
getting more sleep, including more N3 sleep, when
measured objectively.
46
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
46
46

## Page 47

Module 10 11/4/2025
Menopause and Sleep
Symptoms of menopause such as night sweats and mood disorders have major effects on
sleep including reduced N3 sleep
Postmenopausal women have nearly twice the rate of insomnia complaints
as premenopausal women
However, when sleep is measured objectively, these differences are reversed,
suggesting that hormonal status may affect sleep-state misperception
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle
Edition, p.66.
47
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
47
47

## Page 48

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in the Elderly
Less N3 sleep and REM sleep, increased N1 and N2 sleep.
Awakeningsare more frequent, leading to a reduction in sleep time and sleep efficiency.
Sleep timing generally continues to advance, and older people become more morning-type.
The circadian “window” for sleep narrows with old age, limiting the duration of time that sustained
sleep can be achieved.
Failure to achieve 7.5 hours on a daily basis (chronic sleep deficiency) is likely to result in a
progressive decline in alertness and performance over time.
Interestingly, healthy older people appear to be less affected by acute sleep deprivation than
younger subjects and have melatonin levels just as robust as younger subjects.
Some research shows that melatonin supplementation in the elderly with low melatonin levels does
not improve sleep, but exposure to a robust light–dark cycle does.
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.67–68.
48
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
48
48

## Page 49

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep in the Elderly, cont’d
Poor temperature regulation due to poor
circulation is associated with sleep
complaints and may be associated with
sleep complaints in the elderly.
Bed socks may help, as they will decrease
overall heat loss and aid sleep onset.
Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short
introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012.
Kindle Edition, p.69.
49
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
49
49

## Page 50

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Hygiene
Habits and rituals that can improve the ability to fall asleep and stay asleep.
Stick to a sleep schedule
Go to bed and get up at the same time every day, even on weekends and holidays
A 10 pm to 6 am sleep–wake cycle and promotes better sleep throughout the night.
The HPA Axis and adrenal glands do a majority of their recharging and recovering between
the hours of 10pm and 2am.
Create a calming bedtime routine.
Winding down with non-stimulating reading or practicing relaxation techniques like meditation or
breathing exercises can be helpful. Have a warm bath or warm non-caffeinated drink.
Reduce light exposure at night
Dim the lights as much possible in the hour or two before bed.
Avoid using the computer, tablet, phone, or other electronic device for 2 hours before going to bed.
Orange goggles can block out the spectrum of light that interferes with melatonin production
50
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
50
50

## Page 51

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Hygiene, cont’d
Increaseexposure to bright light (preferably outside light) as soon as you wake up and throughout the day
Do not go to bed hungry oroverly full. Some do well with a light dinner, others do better
with a light snack before bed.
Eat at regular times to help establish a normal circadian rhythm by regulating digestion and hormone production
Avoid stimulants like caffeine, sugar, and tobacco --or not after midday so body has time to process them.
Include physical activity early in your day. Lengthy cardio or intense exercise can increase cortisol levels, so don’t
overdo it too late in the day.
Keep blood sugar levels stable (see Diet section of this lesson)
Manage stress by taking steps to slow down, relax, and get perspective. Avoid taking daytime naps of longer than 20
minutes. Listen to your body about the amount of sleep you need
The DRESS For Health Success®Companion Guide has a list of useful tips for getting a good night’s sleep.
51
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
51
51

## Page 52

Module 10 11/4/2025
Creating a Sleeping Sanctuary
Use blackout curtains to make the bedroom pitch black or use an eye mask.
Keep the bedroom slightly cool, no higher than 70°F (21°C).
Keep the bedroom quietwhen sleeping, use earplugs if needed.
Reduce exposure to both light and EMFsin the bedroom
Do not have a TV in the bedroom.
Use battery clocks in place of electric clocks near the bed.
Turn off bedroom circuit breakers.
Eliminate radio frequencies by keeping cordless phones, cell phones,
and wireless devices out of the bedroom.
Do not use a nightlight --if absolutely needed, use a very dim
red-orange light.
Ban pets from the bedroom. Use cotton or natural bedding.
Use beds made from natural materials and no metal.
Keep arguments out of the bedroom.
If you suffer from poor circulation, wear bed socks.
52
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
52
52

## Page 53

Module 10 11/4/2025
Working With The Client (Rest Checklist)
Help the client establish proper sleep cycles by
Sticking to a sleep schedule (ideal is 10 pm to 6 am), and
Creating a sleep sanctuary, creating a calming bedtime routine,
Keeping regular mealtimes,
Managing stress
Putting exerciseinto their daily routine,
Investigate H.I.D.D.E.N. stressors
Turning off the TV and computer screens by 8 pm,
Avoidingsugarandalcoholfor 3 months, and
Avoiding coffee and other caffeine-containing beverages
If they are waking during the night, also focus on
Correcting their dietand balancing blood sugar levels(see D_Diet module), and
Trying a small low-glycemic snack before bedtime.
53
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
53
53

## Page 54

Module 10 11/4/2025
Working With The Client (Rest Checklist)
If melatonin levels are low, consider recommending increased dietary intake of tryptophan,
found in poultry, seafood, and legumes.
Consider recommending mineral supplements and/ormelatoninbefore bedtime, see Supplements module.
Educate the client. Many people are negligent about getting enough sleep because they don’t
understand its importance.
Provide the following:
The D.R.E.S.S. For Health Success®Companion Guide (available on FDNconnect)
Handouts (available on FDNconnect)
Are You Getting Enough Sleep?
Sleep, Stress and Teenagers
A customized plan with daily actions to improve sleep
Following a comprehensive DRESS for Health Success program works!
54
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
54
54

## Page 55

Module 10 11/4/2025
Reading Up On Sleep
Recommended Reading
 Extending your Day is Shortening your Life
http://fdnsales.functionaldiagnosticnutrition.com/extending-your-day-is-shortening-your-life
 How Blue Light from Electronics Can Damage Your Health
http://fdnsales.functionaldiagnosticnutrition.com/how-blue-light-from-electronics-can-
damage-your-health
 Sleep: a very short introduction~ Steven W Lockley & Russell G Foster
 Sleep: what it is – how it works – why we do it – what can go wrong
http://www.howsleepworks.com
 Normal Sleep
http://www.sirirajmedj.com/content.php?content_id=897
55
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
55
55

## Page 56

Module 10 11/4/2025
Sleep Products
Helpful Product Choices
 f.lux® Software
(Reduces blue-light exposure from your computer screen)
https://justgetflux.com
 Uvex S1933X Skyper Safety Eyewear
http://www.amazon.com/Uvex-S1933X-Eyewear-SCT-Orange-Anti-Fog/dp/B000USRG90
 Solar Shield Amber Glasses
(Fits over other glasses)
http://www.amazon.com/Solar-Shield-Fits-Over-Sunglasses-LENSES-
29008AMBER/dp/B000LWJCJW
56
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
56
56

## Page 57

Module 10 11/4/2025
Citations
1. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford UniPress; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp. 26–27.
2. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford UniPress; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp. 26–27.
3. Leproult R et al. Sleep loss results in an elevation of cortisol levels the next evening. Sleep. 1997;20:865–870.
4. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.25.
5. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.130
6. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford UniPress; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp.19–20.
7. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.108.
8. Montgomery P, Dennis J. A systematic review of non-pharmacological therapies for sleep problems in later life. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2004;8:47–
62.
9. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.91.
10. Lasikiewicz N et al. Exploration of basal diurnal salivary cortisol profiles in middle-aged adults: associations with sleep quality and metabolic
parameters. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2008;33:143–151.
11. Richardson GS. The human circadian system in normal and disordered sleep. J ClinPsychiatry. 2005;66(Suppl9):3–9.
12. Hall M et al. Sleep as a mediator of the stress–immune relationship. PsychosomMed. 1998;60(1):48–51. Boivin DB. Disturbances of hormonal circadian
rhythms in shift workers. In: Cardinali D, Pandi-Perumal P (eds). Neuroendocrine Correlates of Sleep/Wakefulness. New York: Springer; 2006.
13. Viswanathan AN et al. Night shift work and the risk of endometrial cancer. Cancer Res. 2007;67:10618–10622.
14. Shamley D. Pathophysiology: an essential text for the allied health professions. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2005.
15. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp.95,121,126.
16. Buxton OM et al. Sleep restriction for 1 week reduces insulin sensitivity in healthy men. Diabetes. 2010;59(9):2126–2133.
17. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, p.93. 19.
18. Carpenter S. Sleep deprivation may be undermining teen health. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 2001. Available from
http://www.apa.org/monitor/oct01/sleepteen.aspx
19. Lockley SW, Foster RG. Sleep: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press; 2012. Kindle Edition, pp. 64–65.
57
© copyright FDN 2008-2025
57
57

