Module 10: Lesson 1 – Slides 1-14
Rest, Recovery, Sleep and Good Health
 
[0:00 - 0:26] Slide 1: Well, fantastic. Here is Module 10. This is rest, part of the D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success program. You're going to get some amazing and fantastic information here on sleep, why it's so important, why proper sleep is a pillar of good health. [Slide 2] Let's start off right with the fact that humans are diurnal, meant to sleep through the night. Diurnal is the opposite of nocturnal. 
[0:27 - 0:39] Slide 2: If you're not sleeping, if you have poor sleep quality, that directly contributes to metabolic chaos, has very serious consequences on metabolism and health. 
[0:39 - 1:00] Slide 2: You could be eating the perfect diet for you, getting adequate exercise, managing stress just fine, taking all the right supplements. But if you're not getting enough sleep, much good will be canceled out. Sleep is a huge priority, and sometimes, those hidden stressors and dysfunctions must be properly investigated. 
[1:00 - 1:20] Slide 2: So, you know that our protocol is the D.R.E.S.S. program, but you've got to do the investigation first. And that's why we, you know, FDN is a system of running labs, looking for healing opportunities, and getting people to do the right thing. So, you always want to run all your labs first, then give them the protocol. 
[1:21 - 1:35] Slide 3: And the importance of sleep, it's amazing. That sleep is an anabolic process. We talked a lot about the anabolic process, you know, anabolism versus catabolism. And we look at cortisol, cortisol to DHEA ratio and these kinds of things. 
[1:36 - 2:04] Slide 3: So, it helps build you up. And lots of hormones are involved, including human growth hormone. And, you know, that's highly involved in rest. It rises when we sleep and you need that for recovery, repairing organs, bones, muscle tissue and all kinds of things. And the immune system is much more activated and brings pathogens into check and helps restore microbial balance when you sleep. 
[2:06 - 2:30] Slide 4: And there's other things. Obviously, this is quite a lesson. You're going to learn a lot. Memory and learning are consolidated as the brain processes memories and ability to solve problems. Sleep helps the brain commit new information to memory by making new neural connections, neuroplasticity. Look that up sometime. It's really interesting how much the brain can actually change. 


[2:30 - 2:52] Slide 4: Normal body cycles are restored. Free radicals are removed from the brain. It's amazing what happens. And synapses, which have been overwhelmed and stimulated during the day, are reset, resulting in our waking up, feeling refreshed, and rejuvenated. Synapses are the little places between the nerves where communication occurs. 
[2:53 - 3:19] Slide 5: Now this is where I want to make sure it's not getting complicated. You know, I'm just giving you some background on sleep and what's going on in the body. We're not going to treat the synapses, you know, the space between the nerve cells in any particular way, in any specific way. So, I just want to remind you, we don't diagnose or treat anything specifically. 
[3:20 - 3:59] Slide 5: We treat everything nonspecifically. We make observations about metabolic chaos through lab works and through just sometimes looking at people and every other way we have of getting an impression about them. And we also remove as many contributors and stressors as possible, contributors to metabolic chaos. And that will at some point unveil or reveal the basic systems that are actually failing. Remember, they could have diarrhea. What's failing? Oh, it's their butt. Well, it could easily be many other things. 
[4:00 - 4:20] Slide 5: So, you have to go through this process. And we nurture and restore function. The hormones, the immune system, digestion, detoxification, elimination. We restore function. Just nurture that and support weak links that are part of metabolic chaos. So, when clients invariably get better, 
[4:21 - 4:55] Slide 5: the biggest mistake you can make, and what I see some new FDNs doing is they hear all this, and they absorb it all and they say they have it. And then the first time you run into a person who says, “I’ve got fibromyalgia,” you wonder, how do I treat that? And you have to really remember, you don't. The general principles of health building that you apply will outperform the other guys who are doing specific treatments. Oh, I can help you treat that. Fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, irritable bowel, you know, you name it. 
[4:56 - 5:15] Slide 5: So, I'm going to implore you many, many, many times to ignore their diagnosis. You have but one, and it's called metabolic chaos, and you have but one system to repair and restore and rebuild. It's called D.R.E.S.S. D.R.E.S.S. treats everything nonspecifically. 
[5:16 - 5:46] Slide 5: It treats every cell. It treats every tissue, every organ, all the systems. So, you don’t have to worry about, going back to that previous slide, what's going on in between the synapses, in between the nerve cells, and we know things are going on there. What we do want to concern ourselves with is that we're removing as 

many contributors and stressors as possible, the things we can identify, and then we're nurturing and supporting and restoring function. 
[5:48 - 5:58] Slide 5: And that's it, and you have to have faith, and that's all you can do. Unless you're a licensed practitioner who can do specific treatments. Yes, I can treat cancer and irritable. We don't. 
[5:59 - 6:38] Slide 5: Now, that's something you must get your arms around. [Slide 6] So, I'm throwing that in here. And now, just specifically with sleep. It treats everything nonspecifically. It's one of our treatments, if you want to call it that. It's one of our general principles of health. Now, if you can get a full eight hours sleep per night, and some people need a little less, young people need a little more, But that will enhance memory, mental clarity, boost mood and ability to moderate emotions, increase ability to handle stress, improves overall energy and digestive health, improves muscle recovery and athletic performance, improves and maintains immune function, 
[6:39 - 7:08] Slide 6: and we might as well say every other function. A good night's sleep can straighten out its share of metabolic chaos, no question about it. Now, you can't just sleep all the time and think you're going to get better if you have a lot of problems. But you get the point. So not everyone needs the same amount of sleep, let me remind you. But consistently sleeping less than six and a half hours has been proven many times to be associated with greater mortality and risk of dis-ease. 
[7:09 - 7:29] Slide 6: Now, again, you shouldn't sleep a lot more than eight, definitely not more than nine, unless you're a teeny baby or a dog or a cat. All right, so now this is important for you to know. You may not explain all this to your clients, but when we sleep, we cycle between non-REM sleep and REM sleep. 
[7:30 - 7:43] Slide 7: Most of us will cycle four or five times per night. Now, there's just one graphic on the right here. I've seen this portrayed many ways in many different books and online and stuff. 
[7:44 - 7:55] Slide 7: But let's just go over some of the basics. And you'll see coming up why you need to get into non-REM sleep. So, REM sleep is rapid eye movement. That's the lighter sleep. 
[7:56 - 8:10] Slide 7: It’s light sleep. You can wake up easily. It totals 20% to 25% of your sleep time in adults, more in infants. Interesting. It begins one to two hours after non-REM sleep begins. 
[8:11 - 8:22] Slide 7: So now I'll just break here. You might have heard me say several times, go to bed at 10.00 and, you know, get up at 6. That's 8 hours. 
[8:22 - 8:54] Slide 7: Why do I say that? And why do I say that getting that couple hours of sleep before midnight? Well, what we notice is that getting to bed a little earlier allows 

you to get into that non-REM sleep, that deep sleep that you need. Then you're going to sort of wake up into non-REM sleep. So, you need to get those deep hours. You can set different patterns, right? But I just want to tell you what has worked based on my observations, having helped thousands of people over many, many years. 
[8:55 - 9:09] Slide 7: Now, this non-REM sleep thing happens about every 90 minutes. It's actually what's known as an ultradian rhythm. We talk a lot about the circadian rhythm. Circadian rhythm is a 24-hour period for the most part. 
[9:10 - 9:24] Slide 7: That’s how I understand it. There's the day and there's the night, and things go up and things go down. But those little things that are less than the 24-hour cycles are actually called the ultradian rhythms. 
[9:25 - 9:37] Slide 7: And there's several of them. Several of them, including how you detoxify, what times you detoxify. This idea of REM sleep and non-REM sleep. Those are actually ultradian rhythms. New word for you. 
[9:38 - 10:12] Slide 7: Look it up for more definition if you like. The other thing we know about rapid eye movement, sleep, it's important. And you'll actually have longer REM sleep later in the night, meaning the first REM period might be 5 or 10 minutes long, whereas the last one might be 20 minutes, all the way up to an hour. That's why sometimes, because this is basically when you're doing the most dreaming or you're remembering these dreams, up to 50 minutes. Jesus, that could be one long dream, if you've ever had them. 
[10:12 - 10:38] Slide 7: Now, the non-REM sleep, it accounts for 75% to 80% of sleep time in adults. Again, about half of that for half of the time infants are asleep. And there are three stages. This is another important thing. Three stages. We call it N1 through N3, from light to deep sleep. Now, when I first started studying this, they actually had five stages, but they've said, no, it's really only three stages. So, I think we're still learning some things about sleep. 
[10:40 - 11:02] Slide 8: Moving right along here, let's look at REM sleep. And, you know, what I want you to do is not memorize all this stuff. I'm teaching you so that you realize how much is actually going on and that sleep is required for balancing out the body in these different ways. You know, the EEG pattern, that's the electroencephalogram, so they hook people up. 
[11:03 - 11:38] Slide 8: And during REM sleep, which is that light, you know, sleep, the pattern is pretty similar to normal awake. The brain is still very active. Although parasympathetic activity is increased and sympathetic activity is actually probably decreased, but more during probably non-REM sleep. So anyway, what's important here is that you need to balance out your nervous system. You need to be parasympathetic at 

times. You know, it's hard during the day sometimes to be parasympathetic, but you need that parasympathetic activity that, you know, the nerves, 
[11:39 - 11:58] Slide 8: the parasympathetic nerves, are responsible for certain things. So, you better give them their time to do stuff. Now you also will have a lot of rapid eye movements, but again, these parasympathetic things might kick in here when you think of loss of temperature regulation, increase in heart rate and blood pressure. 
[11:59 - 12:36] Slide 8: Breathing is rapid, irregular, shallow. Release of steroids, you know, blood flow to the brain increases. Steroids, of course, include testosterone and stuff. Now, most of the dreaming occurs during this state, although it's known that nightmares occur during deep N3 sleep. Now, this is, to me, the most critical thing. That's why I always say, look, let me sleep on it. I tell my staff, I tell my customers, I tell a lot of people, look, okay, that's good, let me sleep on it. Wake up in the morning, guess what, my brain has done the analyzing while I was asleep, processes it, forgets any of the bad stuff. 
[12:37 - 12:53] Slide 8: and so on. So, it's really good to make sure you go to sleep and let your brain work. And then there's skeletal muscles. They're actively inhibited and go limp so that we don't act out our dreams. 
[12:53 - 13:22] Slide 8: And it's really interesting how that works. [Slide 9] So, let's just look real quick here. And again, this obviously isn't exhaustive stuff, but things you need to know. Again, in my head, you just want to know some of the reasons it's so important. And you might read it off to your client at some point, you know. Now, sympathetic activities decrease. That's your fight-flight mechanism. You want it decreased some of the time. You just can't live 24 hours in sympathetic. So, sleep gets you snapped right out of that. 
[13:23 - 14:12] Slide 9: As we just said, parasympathetic is increased and motor activity goes down, except for the certain motor activity controlled by parasympathetic nerves like digestion, movement of the bowels and things like that, food through the canals and stuff. Now, blood flow to the brain decreases, and that's actually a good thing. It allows the brain cells to shrink, and then they can detoxify better. Now, secretion of cortisol, aldosterone, epinephrine, norepinephrine decreases. Good thing. Serotonin is released, maintains the well-being of the brain, Grogginess, impaired motor activity, and the feeling of wanting to return to sleep that sometimes occurs on awakening is thought to occur when waking from deep N3 rather than from light sleep or REM. Now, 
[14:13 - 14:39] Slide 9: grogginess, impaired motor activity, and feeling of wanting to return to sleep. I don't wake up like that too much. I wake up, so I must be more or less in the non-REM sleep, kind of light dreaming, wake up kind of a thing. It's probably good. [Slide 10] Now, other stuff that's going on during non-REM sleep, remember, you should go from awake, transition into N1, go to N2, go to N3. 

[14:40 - 15:21] Slide 10: Then you should have your first period of the REM sleep afterwards. So, this is why I think it's important to go to bed and get a lot of N1 and N2 and finally into N3, deep sleep. If we look at that, we see that you get a lot of these theta and delta waves, slow waves, breathing slows, muscles relax, heart rate decreases, blood pressure decreases, basal metabolic rate falls, and that means you're not burning up energy, you're not burning up resources while you're asleep. You're kind of hibernating a little bit, right? Now, again, brainwaves are slowed. Growth hormone is released. 
[15:21 - 15:45] Slide 10: This is really critical for all your hormones and repairs, organ, muscle tissue, and things like that. Energy is restored, and it's hard to awaken from N3. If you can't be woken up, you're probably in this theta and delta wave sleep. I'd say you need plenty of that. [Slide 11] Now, lack of sleep stages, especially the N3, interferes with restoration. Persistent lack of REM  
[15:46 - 16:40] Slide 11: has been associated with negative psychological outcomes. So that's why a form of enhanced interrogation includes sleep deprivation, psychological outcomes. People can go crazy if you don't let them sleep. And so, it's a form of, again, like torture, really. And so, the other thing is you'll find yourself irritable with anxiety, depression, personality disorders, increased appetite, and things like that. Now increased appetite, what would that lead to? Possibly being overweight and things like that. So that's just not good. [Slide 12] Other effects of sleep deprivation. Fewer than six hours contributes to metabolic chaos. I'm certain of this after 20 years of observing people. And, you know, remember, D-R-E-S-S, R is one-fifth of the entire protocol. Because, you know, 
[16:41 - 16:51] Slide 12: If you don't sleep, you're going to impair tissue growth and repair, decrease motor performance. Remember, that's not just your active thinking muscle performance. 
[16:53 - 17:22] Slide 12: It’s the involuntary muscle and motor performance. Impairs the immune system, increases inflammation, alters glucose metabolism in a negative way, worsens insulin resistance, increases appetite, leads to obesity, impairs memory and concentration, impairs the generation of nerve cells, which can lead to cognitive decline. Impairs mood and mental health. Depression and anxiety associated with increased risk-taking, risky behavior. 
[17:23 - 17:47] Slide 12: Might make you stick your finger in a light socket or something. I don't know. But associated with digestive issues, obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease. You're getting the point. And all these release stress hormones in the body. So, this is why sometimes we see people with the high cortisol in the morning. It's just a result of maybe not sleeping so good. And their cortisol output otherwise might be pretty low. 

[17:47 - 18:38] Slide 12: So that's where some of that interpretation stuff I gave you came from. [Slide 13] Now, this is probably the most amazing thing. Over a lifetime or a decade or a couple decades of not sleeping, you can't make it up. That's why old people who haven't slept well are a lot less healthy. Failure to achieve an appropriate amount of sleep leads to chronic sleep deficiency or the accumulation of sleep debt. Like many monetary contracts, however, there are strict rules on when the sleep debt must be repaid, and it cannot be put off indefinitely without incurring large penalties, in this case one's health, and including mental health. Unlike most monetary contracts, however, sleep deficiency has to be repaid each day and sleeping in at weekends does not seem to 
[18:38 - 19:01] Slide 13: be sufficient to repay a week's worth of bad sleep. Unfortunately, sleep credits are very difficult to obtain. Simply put, regular daily substantial sleep deposits are needed to maintain a healthy balance in the sleep bank. Now, at the end of this slide deck are the references, and you can look it up there. I have them there for you. 
[19:01 - 19:12] Slide 14: Critical stuff. More about sleep debt. After about two weeks with fewer than six hours of sleep per night, performance levels fall to the same level as someone with 24 hours of acute sleep deprivation. 
[19:13 - 19:46] Slide 14: With four hours in bed per night, it only takes seven days to reach that level. And after two weeks, performance is equivalent to two, three days without sleep. So, look, you know, you got clients, and maybe you need to check yourself, you know. If you're getting like just the six hours or five hours or four hours, you're pretty much walking around like someone who hasn't slept in a couple days. And people think that's normal. They get to think it's normal. So, you really need to take this big step back when you're looking at your clients and you're doing your assessments and your impression forming and things like that. 
[19:47 - 20:18] Slide 14: They’re walking around dopey, a lot of them. And so, the only thing they can do is get to bed and get a good night's sleep and see what shakes up. Now, we cannot accurately judge how impaired we are when sleep-deprived, rather like when we think we can be great drivers after drinking too much. If acute and chronic sleep deprivation are combined, for example, by failing to get enough recovery sleep after staying up all night on repeated occasions, the harmful effects on performance are multiplied up to ten times. 
[20:19 - 20:29] Slide 14: Just like going to the gym or following a diet plan, it takes concerted effort every day to get enough sleep and avoid the health and safety effects of acute and chronic sleep deprivation. 

[20:29 - 20:42] Slide 14: You know, a lot of people are coming home and they're sleeping on the sofa with the TV on and stuff like that. They need to be told and coached and encouraged and otherwise, you know, threatened with something. 
[20:43 - 20:54] Slide 14: You know what, don't do that. Go upstairs to bed, wherever you do that. Get into your sleep sanctuary. So that's going to be a short break right there. 
[20:55 - 20:55] Slide 14: Stand by. 

















	






Module 10: Lesson 2 – Slides 15-35
Rest, Recovery, Sleep and Good Health

[0:00 - 0:38] Slide 15: All right, so we're going to just start this next little section here with the circadian rhythm. A few more details about that. And you can check out the graphic there. But the circadian rhythm is the body's 24-hour cycle that governs the timing and many of its behavioral, physiological, and metabolic functions, the sleep-wake cycle, hormone release, body temperature, glucose and insulin levels, cardiac and lung function, and more. And when you understand these are on a rhythm, it makes it easier to manage activities and things. And some of these, remember, will be on that ultradian.
[0:38 - 0:54] Slide 15: We went over that term a few slides back. Ultradian rhythms. So, there are the 24-hour cycles, and there are little cycles within that, little fluctuations and things. And we might call those ultradian rhythms. [Slide 16] One of them is hormone fluctuations.
[0:55 - 1:40] Slide 16: Again, can't emphasize how critical these are and how critical sleep is to establishing good hormone cycles. And you've got melatonin, you've got cortisol, you've got growth hormone, human growth hormone, of course, thyroid-stimulating hormone, prolactin, aldosterone, testosterone, these kind of things. [Slide 17] So, let's look in particular at this melatonin. Now, part of it comes from the pineal gland, as we have explained. It's released into the blood and cerebrospinal fluid. It interacts with the hypothalamus to induce drowsiness and therefore the onset of sleep. The production of melatonin from the pineal gland is regulated by light exposure, increases
[1:40 - 2:16] Slide 17: after sundown and during the night during the normal light-dark cycle. By normal, we mean normal light-dark cycle for humans because we are diurnal, remember? Now, as the length of daylight varies with season, so does the cycle of melatonin. Nighttime light exposure suppresses production. This is why some people have low melatonin because they've got too much light going on, especially certain kinds of light. [Slide 18] So now melatonin from the gut maintains baseline levels, which we return to during the day. Levels are unaffected by whether or not sleep occurs,
[2:17 - 2:48] Slide 18: and these typically are suppressed by cortisol. And melatonin, of course, is good for you. It increases immune cytokine function. Those little cells that go around to clean up the place, clean up garbage. Increases killer T cells. That helps protect us against infection. And it acts as an antioxidant. I think it's a top-notch antioxidant. What do we need that for? Well, we have oxidative stress that we measure on lipid peroxides.

[2:49 - 3:09] Slide 18: So low melatonin, could that be part of elevated lipid peroxides? Yes, it could. Melatonin is synthesized from tryptophan. That's a dietary amino acid. It can be addressed by eating more foods containing tryptophan such as poultry, seafood, and legumes.
[3:10 - 3:42] Slide 19: Cortisol is another critical hormone, fluctuates with the circadian rhythm, rises shortly before we awake. In fact, I think it wakes us up. Notice this in elevating blood glucose levels by breakdown of proteins, meaning it will break down anything, muscle tissue, whatever, to raise blood sugar. It rises more once we wake up. Cortisol awakening response, largely based on perceived stress. So, you know, when you wake up, you wake up. That's your baseline. The higher it goes,
[3:43 - 4:21] Slide 19: likely it's due to some kind of stress or perceived stress. Now, it should come back. down relatively quickly, within an hour actually, to back closer to the baseline or a little above the baseline. That cortisol waking response is where it peaks out in the first hour of sleep of waking up. Now it's followed by a decline over the day. Lowest levels around the middle of the night so as to maintain sleep. Remember it suppresses melatonin so you want it very low at night when you need the melatonin to sleep well. The minor fluctuations do occur overnight to cycle between various sleep stages.
[4:22 - 5:00] Slide 19: Very interesting. Levels are not particularly affected whether asleep or awake, although waking from sleep causes a small additional elevation. [Slide 20] Cortisol and sleep problems. Remember, this is something we measure in every person, so it's good to know this stuff. Nighttime cortisol elevations due to loss of sleep the night before or from stress, whether it be external or hidden, increases sympathetic nervous system activity, which increases alertness and makes sleep difficult, depresses melatonin secretion, which can delay the sleep cycle, and cortisol elevations may hold over to the morning.
[5:00 - 5:17] Slide 20: Which is why, again, we teach you that elevated morning cortisol or relatively elevated morning cortisol might show up. Now, HPA axis dysfunction, what we used to call adrenal fatigue and things, leads to low cortisol levels, right?
[5:18 - 5:48] Slide 20: And because cortisol plays a role in regulating blood glucose levels, lower than normal nighttime cortisol does not sustain blood glucose at an adequate level. And drops in blood glucose disrupts sleep by triggering waking during the night. I have to tell you, folks, among other things like alcohol, I think the dropping of blood sugar is the critical element. I think drop of blood sugar is what's waking most people up, other things being equal. That's why we use some snacks
[5:48 - 6:09] Slide 20: sometimes, special snacks before sleeping, so that that doesn't happen. Now, more about that in protocols, of course, but many people awaken 

between 2 and 3 a.m., and in Chinese medicine, this is liver time, which could be a useful clue. You'll see when we put all of this together in protocols.
[6:10 - 6:26] Slide 21: More on hormones. Growth hormone. That's something that's very, very important. It's very much sleep-dependent with little influence from the circadian system. It's secreted primarily during sleep, N3 sleep.
[6:27 - 7:01] Slide 21: Think how important N3 sleep is. And it goes to very low levels under conditions of sleep deprivation. Enables the maintenance of growth and restorative processes. So, growth hormone is what it sounds like. It enables the maintenance of growth. and restorative process of growth, regrowth, rebuilding, whatever you want to call it. Growth hormone is anabolic. It stimulates tissue regeneration, liver regeneration, muscle growth, breakdown of fat stores. It's involved in blood sugar regulation. It's been called the anti-aging hormone. Amazing.
[7:02 - 7:18] Slide 22: Got to get to sleep. Now, TSH fluctuations. You all know that TSH is thyroid-stimulating hormone. Keeps your thyroid hormone levels where they should be. Now, these are very strongly sleep-dependent with little influence of the circadian system.
[7:19 - 7:37] Slide 22: Going without sleep elevates your TSH and has a small peak close to sleep onset under normal conditions. Now, when measured without sleep, a robust circadian rhythm in TSH is revealed with a nighttime peak that is usually suppressed by sleep at night.
[7:38 - 7:51] Slide 23: Now, sleep and stress. Okay, so stress can be both the cause and result of sleep loss. The natural rhythms of hormone secretion can be altered by the stress response affecting sleep.
[7:52 - 8:08] Slide 23: Stress can result in surges or dips in hormone secretion that don't match the regular circadian or sleep-wake patterns. Stress response increases cortisol production and sympathetic nervous system activity, increasing alertness, making it difficult to fall asleep.
[8:09 - 8:26] Slide 23: Lack of sleep increases production of stress hormones. Elevated cortisol affects sleep directly, raises blood sugar, also lowers your melatonin, affecting the ability to fall asleep. Some of this is a repeat, but we like to have it on separate slides sometimes.
[8:28 - 8:40] Slide 24: There are circadian clocks in other organs. Nearly all organs are capable of generating their own circadian rhythms in addition to those generated by the master clock in the brain. Proper synchronization between these internal rhythms,
[8:42 - 9:15] Slide 24: which I've already said is ultradian rhythm, is required for maintaining proper metabolic function and avoiding metabolic chaos. For example, the 

circadian clocks in the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, intestine, liver, kidney, and bladder must be synchronized together in order for the digestive elimination and detoxification processes to work properly. So really, circadian rhythm, and they're saying circadian rhythms, and really, some of these smaller internal ones are also known as ultradian rhythms.
[9:16 - 9:49] Slide 24: Now, these rhythms are sensitive to non-light time cues, such as when you eat or drink. Notice the biggest one is drinking. Main consistent mealtimes, not only experienced by shift workers, therefore result in poor digestive elimination and detoxification function. Huh. Imagine that. [Slide 25] Other factors affecting sleep cycles are exposure to light before and during sleep. low blood sugar, or other hidden stressors, which elevate cortisol, which promotes awakening, exposure to EMFs or toxins in the bedroom, cordless
[9:49 - 10:20] Slide 25: phones, cell phones, wireless devices, electric blankets, unnatural mattress materials, and things. Even the metal frames and bedsprings can interfere with regular sleep. Stress and any stress, including poor diet, affects sleep. Alcohol, sleeping pills, other medications, suppresses REM sleep. Tranquilizers like Valium suppresses deep, and N3 sleep. And, of course, we all know about air travel, shift work and of course, alarm clocks, and other things that might just be bugging you a little.
[10:21 - 10:41] Slide 26: Now, light exposure. This is pretty critical. This is a lot of what drives the circadian rhythm. And it is this idea. This might not be a real clear picture. But there's this part in the hypothalamus that's called the suprachiasmatic nucleus. SCN. Suprachiasmatic nucleus SCN.
[10:43 - 10:59] Slide 26: Now, let's look at how light exposure impacts sleep. It impacts your circadian rhythm by disturbing the timing of the circadian clock. Late evening light exposure shifts the circadian clock to a later time.
[10:59 - 11:12] Slide 26: Early morning light exposure shifts the clock to an earlier time. So, That makes a lot of sense. Get up earlier with lots of light, it's going to shift the clock that way.
[11:13 - 11:25] Slide 26: Stay up later and have lots of light, it's going to shift the clock that way a little bit. You know, just think of moving from one country to another. You're going to eventually adjust to that daylight cycle.
[11:25 - 11:43] Slide 26: And it has to do with this thing, it's called the suprachiasmatic nucleus up in the brain. It's actually in the hypothalamus-pituitary area. And It's very sensitive to light. You've heard me talk about what influences the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, right?

[11:44 - 12:02] Slide 26: Well, it's the limbic system, toxins and things, and including light. So that's very important. So light exposure reduces homeostatic sleep drive by improving subjective and objective measures of alertness. You can see better.
[12:03 - 12:14] Slide 26: And suppresses pineal melatonin, covered that. It increases nighttime heart rate and core temperature levels. So, it could affect it in bad ways.
[12:15 - 12:29] Slide 27: Caffeine in sleep should not be a brain stretch for anybody. Due to a genetic variation in the liver enzyme that breaks down caffeine, some people eliminate caffeine quickly and others more slowly. That one seems to stay with me.
[12:29 - 12:42] Slide 27: I can't drink caffeine past 2 o'clock in the afternoon. And other people, though, they could drink it at 6 o'clock at dinner and they're fine. Mine stays with me. In other words, it metabolizes pretty slow.
[12:43 - 13:06] Slide 27: Caffeine blocks the effects of adenosine, which is a natural substance that helps you sleep. Now, it's also a drug, but we're talking about the natural adenosine here. And it does build up during wakefulness unless it's blocked by caffeine. So, caffeine doesn't just stimulate you. It blocks other things which help you sleep. It increases blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature.
[13:07 - 13:18] Slide 27: And even if consumed in the morning, sleep can be affected. Longer sleep latency, reduces sleep duration, suppresses deep sleep. Not a good thing to consume if you want to get a good night's sleep, is it?
[13:19 - 13:37] Slide 28: Alcohol and sleep is one of my big sort of pet peeves. People won't quit drinking. Now, just for three months, come on, you can do that. Now, during periods of heavy drinking, up to two years after stopping, there’s reduced sleep, the deep sleep, and N3 sleep.
[13:38 - 14:04] Slide 28: Suppressed REM sleep. Fragmented sleep during the second half of the night and shortened overall sleep duration. Rates of insomnia in alcoholics are reported to be between 40% and 70%. I think maybe up to 100%. [Slide 29] Now, exercise and sleep, regular exercise, promotes improvement in sleep quality. Early in the day is best. Lengthy cardio or intense exercise can increase cortisol levels, so don't overdo it too late in the day.
[14:05 - 14:40] Slide 30: Okay, the next item up, daylight savings time. Now, this is an important shift, and in the spring, it will cause the loss of an hour's sleep, obviously. This coincides with a near 20% increase in motor vehicle accidents the Monday morning after the change. That's remarkable. And, you know, some people don't make it up for days. This is interesting. The risk of a heart attack was up by 5% in the first three weeks after daylight saving times. But that does not happen when the clocks fall back in the fall. [Slide 31] Now, sleep and immunity is also pretty critical.

[14:41 - 15:00] Slide 31: Abnormalities in the circadian pattern of cortisol can alter immune system function. Well, we know that. This has been associated with disease. And melatonin production by the pineal gland can be blocked by light or some medicines. The immune response is therefore repressed.
[15:01 - 15:14] Slide 31: And melatonin supplementation can reverse these effects. Good thing. Stress-induced sleep loss directly inhibits an innate immune response by reducing the numbers of natural killer cells.
[15:15 - 15:54] Slide 31: We know that your immune system goes down when you lose sleep. [Slide 32] Now this is pretty critical for those who might want to lose a few pounds. Sleep deprivation and appetite. Obviously, it's going to be good to get sleep now. I think you're getting the point. The ratio of hormones, leptin and ghrelin, helps to regulate our appetite. Leptin is the satiety hormone primarily made in large fat cells. not to small fat cells, and high levels reduce our appetite. So, a baseline is released into the bloodstream regularly, signaling the hypothalamus about the amount of stored fat in the body. More leptin is stimulated by eating,
[15:55 - 16:21] Slide 32: helping us to know when we've had enough to eat. Levels are generally higher at night to ensure that we eat at the right time of day. And, of course, we would be concerned sometimes with leptin resistance, where that system isn't working real well. Now, ghrelin, on the other hand, is the hunger hormone secreted by the stomach. High levels stimulate the appetite, and levels would increase, of course, with increasing time between meals.
[16:22 - 16:48] Slide 32: So, after a meal, leptin levels are high, ghrelin levels are low, which reduces our appetite. And all that's great, all things being equal. But sleep deprivation, particularly of deep N3 sleep, decreases the level of leptin, and increases production of ghrelin, which increases appetite and overeating. Isn't that amazing? So, if you're not getting your N3 sleep, you're going to just feel hungry and have an appetite.
[16:49 - 17:03] Slide 33: Now let's talk about shift work because I get asked this all the time. Now, during the first few days of shift work, no real change in melatonin and cortisol secretion patterns. But over time, melatonin and cortisol secretion decreases.
[17:04 - 17:15] Slide 33: Now it can take two weeks to reset a new circadian rhythm, by which time the shift worker may have been rotated to a different shift and therefore either partially adapt or just not adapt at all.
[17:16 - 17:37] Slide 33: And so, if you're going back and forth, you probably didn't really adapt to the change, and that would make it pretty tough on your body. Trying to sleep at the wrong circadian phase reduces sleep duration, alters the type and quality of sleep, and affects hormone levels and metabolism. So certain things should roll off your tongue. Folks, listen.

[17:39 - 18:13] Slide 33: It says it alters the type and quality of sleep. What you now know is that means REM and the three phases of non-REM sleep. And you need to spend the appropriate amount of time in each one. So, you can say to people, look, we want to establish really healthy types of sleep and quality of sleep and these kind of things. Now, a meal eaten at 1:30 a.m. will result in higher blood levels of glucose, insulin, and fats for several hours after the meal compared with eating the same meal at 1:30 p.m.
[18:14 - 18:26] Slide 33: So, 1:30 a.m., you know, because you're on shift work, right? You're eating 1:30 a.m. And it's going to raise your blood sugar, insulin, and fats compared to eating the same meal at 1:30 p.m.
[18:27 - 18:41] Slide 33: Not good to have lunch at 1:30 in the morning, is it? So, shift workers experience sleep problems, fatigue, poor performance, plus memory, intestinal problems, and greater risk of accidents and injuries, and have increased long-term risk for chronic disease. That we know.
[18:42 - 19:07] Slide 34: So, what do you do? Well, shift duration should be minimized with night shifts as short as possible. The number of consecutive night shifts should be minimized, and rotating shifts should cycle in a delayed direction. In other words, from morning to evening to night shifts. So, you want to start getting up later and later, if possible. That would be the delay over time.
[19:08 - 19:38] Slide 34: As much time off as possible should be given after night shifts to maximize recovery sleep. Shift workers should get home and sleep as soon as possible after the shift ends, not watch TV, answer email, and all that crap. Shift workers should use an eye mask and earplugs, and switch off the telephone when sleeping. Caffeine consumption should stop at least five hours before the planned sleep time. Absolutely. [Slide 35] So, you know, this is a lot of research from different places, and so you'll see a few repeat things,
[19:39 - 19:56] Slide 35: you know, because it just came along with that research on that item. Like here we have jet lag, and, you know, you might see something we've already talked about. Jet lag has the same effect as shift work. Common symptoms include insomnia, fatigue, impaired cognition, and gastrointestinal problems.
[19:57 - 20:12] Slide 35: As with shift work, the circadian system can't adapt to the rapid change of light-dark exposure, and the symptoms persist until the circadian system has adapted to the new destination, which takes at least one day per time zone.
[20:13 - 20:23] Slide 35: Adaptation to a new time zone can be accelerated by using light exposure, natural or indoor, and light avoidance, using dark sunglasses, or napping at the appropriate times.

[20:24 - 20:35] Slide 35: So, you know, you get up and you should use your light. I actually just bought one. It's right here. I just bought this thing. It's called Lightphoria with the PH, Lightphoria.
[20:36 - 20:53] Slide 35: It was cheap. They got them that cost hundreds of dollars. This one was like $39 or something off Amazon. And I'm going to play around with that. Calculating when to seek light or avoid light. It depends on the number of time zones crossed and the direction of travel.
[20:53 - 21:24] Slide 35: So, if you're going back east from west, you definitely want to shine that light. You know, you're getting up at 8 o'clock local time, but to you it's 5 in the morning. So, you need to use that light. That's why I bought this little one. It'll go in my suitcase, and I can take it with me, and I'll hopefully reset my circadian rhythm a lot better or at least just help me adapt. All right, so that's the light, and then the dark part, you know, I'm going to have to put on dark sunglasses somewhere along the line.
[21:25 - 21:32] Slide 35: Okay, and here's something for you to check out, www.jetlagrooster.com. It's just a simple little thing. You can go check that out.

















Module 10: Lesson 3 – Slides 36-57
Rest, Recovery, Sleep and Good Health

[0:01 - 0:14] slide 36: Now, another big giant thing when it comes to sleep is blood sugar regulation. And not sleeping, not good. Restricting sleep to only five hours per night for one week significantly reduces insulin sensitivity.
[0:15 - 0:33] slide 36: In other words, increases insulin resistance. One of the worst things that a person could have for their health and for their weight and all kinds of things like that. The ability of glucose to regulate its own levels independent of insulin also becomes impaired. We get what's called decreased glucose tolerance.
[0:34 - 0:46] slide 36: Now, you can just refer to the D diet lessons for strategies on how to balance this, but just letting you know how critical, critical, critical it is. Another good reason to do it. And most people require seven, eight hours of sleep per night.
[0:46 - 1:09] slide 37: Well, how are you going to do that? Well, sticking to a sleep schedule, matching our natural circadian rhythm, reinforces the sleep-wake cycle. The best thing to do is to create a calming bedtime routine, Practice relaxation, meditation, breathing exercises. And know that each hour of sleep before midnight is worth two hours of sleep after midnight to rebuild and detoxify the body and to rest the adrenal glands.
[1:10 - 1:33] slide 37: I eat a small snack containing protein, low glycemic carbohydrates, and healthy fats. That would help prevent a drop in blood sugar levels during the night. Taking a multimineral supplement before bedtime also helps in many cases to relax the body. Avoid sugar and alcohol for the first 90 days of any program. Absolutely. [slide 38] Now, insomnia is huge in our business.
[1:34 - 1:44] slide 38: Matter of fact, you know, D-R-E-S-S is the solution. But sometimes the R of rest is what they aren’t getting. It's their main complaint in many, many cases.
[1:46 - 1:57] slide 38: Now, there's two kinds, basically. There's sleep onset insomnia, meaning they can't fall asleep, or sleep maintenance insomnia, meaning they wake up a lot. Or way too early.
[1:58 - 2:08] slide 38: Any factor that prevents the body and mind from relaxing is a stressor and therefore raises adrenaline and cortisol or blocks melatonin or serotonin production.
[2:09 - 2:36] slide 38:  There are physiological factors, physical stress, recreational drugs, medicinal drugs, stimulants, environmental factors, and health conditions that a person 

might have, like sleep apnea. That's huge. So, anyone having an irregular sleep-wake cycle must look for hidden stressors. They've got to be properly investigated. [slide 39] So, this thing here is OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.
[2:37 - 3:08] slide 39: It’s repeated, partial, or complete closing of the airway during sleep, cutting off the air supply and causing the person to start to suffocate and then wake up often with a gasp. So, it's regular sleep disruption prevents getting into the deep N3 sleep that restores alertness, results in fatigue and cognitive problems. OSA is highly prevalent in middle-aged, overweight clients, particularly men and post-menopausal women. Obesity and large neck size are risk factors as the increased fat around the neck compresses the
[3:08 - 3:25] slide 39: airway when laying down. Sometimes people just need to lose a little weight. Not always, but it's very helpful. [slide 40] Now we have a lot of pregnant clients. or clients who want to get pregnant and need to know a few things. On average, sleep duration increases by one hour each night during the first trimester.
[3:26 - 3:51] slide 40: Sleep disruption and fatigue are also high. N3 sleep and REM sleep may reduce slightly towards the end of pregnancy. Common symptoms during pregnancy that can disrupt sleep, the typical physical discomfort, fetal activity, excessive urination, acid reflux, insomnia, excessive sleepiness, snoring and shortness of breath, possibly due to the effects of progesterone on respiration.
[3:53 - 4:07] slide 40: So, progesterone is very relaxing and can shorten the breath. Also leg cramps and restless leg syndrome, RLS, restless leg syndrome. Now postpartum depression may be associated with greater sleep disruption. I bet it is.
[4:08 - 4:27] slide 41: We’re going to go through sleep in pregnancy, sleep in babies, and so on. In the first few weeks of life, there's seemingly random sleep-wake patterns. totaling up to 16 hours sleep over the day and night, kind of like a cat. However, the homeostatic control of sleep is apparent even in babies. The circadian rhythm.
[4:28 - 4:52] slide 41: The circadian clock begins to generate non-24-hour sleep-wake rhythms but cannot yet be synchronized to the 24-hour light-dark cycle. So, in other words, cycles start to appear, but they're not quite on the 24-hour cycle, until about 2 to 6 months, then the distinct 24-hour cycle emerges, with a major nighttime sleep episode and shorter naps in the daytime.
[4:52 - 5:07] slide 41: That stabilizes at 6 to 12 months of age, we hope. Melatonin is passed in breast milk, and if breastfed at night, rather than pumped in the day and given at night, this might provide a synchronizing time cue in early life.

[5:08 - 5:23] slide 41: I’ve always said you know, that's the best way to go, breastfeeding. The non-REM and REM cycle, at two weeks of age, half of the sleep episode consists of REM sleep. That's 50% REM sleep. That's way more than adults, of course.
[5:24 - 5:39] slide 41: By six months of age, REM sleep reduces to about a third, much closer to adults. And REM sleep is necessary for consolidating the new information that babies need to learn and memorize. Good stuff. [slide 42] Now, sleep plays a key role in brain maturation and therefore getting adequate sleep is vitally important for cognitive development. To encourage sleep and synchronize the biological clock, keep the sleep environment as dark as possible.
[5:43 - 6:10] slide 42: Some tips here are using blackout curtain. Avoid nightlights. Keep the room quiet. Avoid playing tunes to soothe the baby. They should learn to sleep in the quiet. As the baby gets older, develop a stable schedule with a strong 24-hour pattern of light days and dark nights. Easy enough.
[6:11 - 6:27] slide 43: When children are a little older, sleep is vitally important for the health and development, continuing development of the child. To help synchronize the circadian clock and maintain a more regular sleep-wake pattern, there are certain bedtime rituals. These should occur in as dim light as possible.
[6:28 - 7:04] slide 43: Use of dim, incandescent red light sources are preferable. And the new bright bluer LED type of light should be avoided in the bedroom, as should computer screens. They're pure blue light for the most part, I think. Now, children should never consume caffeine. Sleep deprivation can cause overactivation, and they might be accused of having some weird disease. Overtired children act up and have temper tantrums and are moody, irritable, and sometimes aggressive. Chronic sleep deficiency is likely to exacerbate problem behaviors such as ADHD.
[7:05 - 7:15] slide 43: Matter of fact, it might be why they're getting accused of having it. Yeah. [slide 44] Now, in adolescence, they do get to sleep in. They require considerably more sleep than younger children or adults.
[7:16 - 7:58] slide 44: Starting around puberty and into their early 20s, adolescents need 9.2 hours of sleep each night compared with the 7.5 to 8 that adults need. Adolescents experience a delay in their sleep and circadian rhythm. So, what does that mean, delay? It means they sleep later. With a 2–3-hour change in the timing of their circadian clock over their teenage years, correlating closely with pubescent development, pubertal or pubescent development, you know, going through puberty. In addition, older teenagers tend to have reduced N3 sleep and have a slower rate of homeostatic sleep drive building 

up during the day. So, exposure to light in the evening delays melatonin secretion for those who are in the middle or late puberty,
[7:59 - 8:36] slide 44: but not for prepubertal subjects. Its prepubescent might be a better way to put that. [slide 45] To continue... Having to get up for school results in a dramatic curtailing of their sleep five days a week, and when they try and sleep, according to their natural sleep cycle at weekends, they're often harangued for being lazy and made to get up. I know it. Now, having teenagers get up for school at 7 a.m. is like asking adults to wake up 4 a.m. So, it's not surprising that teenagers are unresponsive and irritated. Modest delays in school start times can have a major effect on academic performance and behavior.
[8:37 - 8:49] slide 45: That means if you let them sleep in a little bit, they could do better academically. Protecting time for sleep, particularly on weekends, is important, as is monitoring of late evening extracurricular activities.
[8:50 - 9:07] slide 45: Obviously, caffeine use and other factors that reduce sleep need to be monitored. While it is difficult for the delay to be entirely corrected, gradually advancing bedtimes, and reducing activities and light exposure prior to bed may help shift bedtimes earlier and increase sleep opportunities.
[9:08 - 9:25] slide 45: Sleep opportunities, I love those. What they're saying when they say advancing bedtimes, I mean, you know, try to get your adolescent to go to bed a little earlier. Just maybe half hour here, half hour there. Pretty soon they're going to bed, you know, an hour and a half earlier. And it just really makes sense.
[9:26 - 10:01] slide 46: Now in middle age, we could have problems there too. The timing of the circadian clock gradually advances as we age, making us more morning types. Sleep duration reduces, including the proportion of N3 sleep and REM sleep. This reduction in the homeostatic regulation of sleep makes it harder to recover from sleep deprivation or adapt to working split shifts. Gender differences in sleep and sleep perception, that's important, become more pronounced in middle age. With women generally having more complaints about sleep than men,
[10:01 - 10:20] slide 46: despite getting more sleep, including more N3 sleep, when measured objectively. Women do sleep better, you know, factually through sleep studies. It's one thing that has been studied an awful lot. [slide 47] Now, symptoms of menopause, such as night sweats and mood disorders, have major effects on sleep, including reduced N3 sleep.
[10:21 - 10:43] slide 47:  Post-menopausal women have nearly twice the rate of insomnia complaints as pre-menopausal women. However, when sleep is measured objectively, these differences are reversed, suggesting that hormonal status may affect sleep state 

misperception. So, post-menopausal women actually get better sleep objectively, but complain more.
[10:44 - 11:28] slide 48: In the elderly, you get less N3 sleep and REM sleep and increased N1 and N2 sleep. Awakenings are more frequent, leading to a reduction in sleep time and sleep efficiency. Sleeping time generally continues to advance and older people become more morning type. The circadian window for sleep narrows with old age, limiting the duration of time that sustained sleep can be achieved. Failure to achieve seven and a half hours on a daily basis is likely to result in a progressive decline in alertness and performance over time. Yeah, of course, we've said that ten times already. Interestingly, healthy older people appear to be less affected by acute sleep deprivation than younger subjects and have melatonin levels
[11:29 - 11:42] slide 48: just about as robust as younger subjects. Some research shows that melatonin supplementation in the elderly with low melatonin levels does not improve sleep, but exposure to robust light-dark cycle does.
[11:43 - 12:02] slide 48: I guess I'm not really elderly. I'm sort of elderly. All right, so I'm elderly. But, you know, I got my light. And I'm going to use it and make sure that I'm really getting that sleep. [slide 49] Now, poor temperature regulation due to poor circulation is associated with sleep complaints and may be associated with sleep complaints in the elderly.
[12:03 - 12:18] slide 49: For sure. Old people do not have as good circulation. And that means they don't regulate their temperature very well or as well. And that means they will have more sleep problems. Bed socks may help, as they will decrease overall heat loss and aid sleep onset.
[12:19 - 12:50] slide 49: I do put my socks on to go to bed, but I kick them off like in five minutes. Socks on the bed. [slide 50] Sleep hygiene. All right, this is critical. As we get to the last few slides here, folks, you can pick up a lot of tips here. Habits and rituals that can improve the ability to fall asleep and stay asleep. Number one, stick to a sleep schedule. Go to bed and get up at the same time every day, even weekends and holidays. 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. is a great sleep-wake cycle. It promotes better sleep throughout the night. And
[12:50 - 13:02] slide 50: we've studied this a lot, the HPA axis and adrenal glands. They do a majority of the recharging and recovering between the hours of 10 and 2. And the liver does a lot of recharging then too.
[13:03 - 13:34] Presenter:  A lot of it's according to Chinese medicine, and then we have some of the science of Western medicine. We know that getting sleep before midnight is good. Then you can try to sleep a good solid six hours after that and you should be okay. 

Now, another thing you can do, consider a big part of sleep hygiene, create a calming bedtime routine. Winding down with non-stimulating reading or practicing relaxation techniques like meditation or breathing. That can be very helpful. Have a warm bath or warm non-caffeinated drink.
[13:34 - 13:50] slide 50: Reduce light exposure at night. Another big tip. Dim the lights. Avoid using the computer and all these things. And also, get you some orange goggles if you have to be up and walking around under the full spectrum light and things like that.
[13:50 - 14:31] slide 51: More on sleep hygiene. Increase exposure to bright light as soon as you wake up and throughout the day. Do not go to bed hungry or overly full. Some do well with a light dinner. Others do better with a light snack before bed. You're going to have to find out with each client which one they do best with. But generally, we don't eat huge, huge meals at dinner anyway. And some people, if you do have a light dinner, they're still going to need a little light snack, you know, glycemically balanced, something that's not going to spike their blood sugar. Eat at regular times to establish a normal circadian rhythm by regulating digestion and hormone production. Avoid stimulants of caffeine, sugar, and tobacco,
[14:32 - 14:43] slide 51: or don't use them after midday so the body has time to process them. Remember what I said earlier, is that some people are good excretors of caffeine. They can process caffeine really well. Others can't.
[14:44 - 15:07] slide 51: So, everybody's different. Also, you must include physical activity early in your day. And remember that lengthy cardio or intense exercise can increase cortisol levels, so don't do that too late in the day. And as we said about ten times, keep blood sugar levels stable. Manage stress by taking steps to slow down, relax, and get perspective on your life. Maybe it's not so bad.
[15:08 - 15:26] slide 51: Avoid taking daytime naps of longer than 20 minutes. Listen to your body about the amount of sleep you need. And if you haven't read it yet, grab the D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success companion guide. It has a list of useful tips for getting a good night's sleep. [slide 52] Another big thing is creating a sleeping sanctuary. Blackout curtains.
[15:27 - 15:56] slide 52: Make sure it's real black or use an eye mask. Keep the bedroom slightly cool. No higher than 70 degrees. Now, I find that to be hard to do in Southern California without air conditioning but so be it. Keep the bedroom quiet when sleeping. Use earplugs if needed. Reduce exposure to both light and EMS in the bedroom. So, TV, much as we all love to have it sometimes, you know, it's really not the best thing for you. And there's some other tips there.

[15:58 - 16:14] slide 52: You know, you're not supposed to use a nightlight. It's really supposed to be dark. That really will help. And you've seen why. The suprachiasmatic nucleus, you know, needs to have no stimulation whatsoever. You can ban your pets from the bedroom. They do tend to move around and keep you up.
[16:14 - 16:26] slide 52:   I used to have a cat and it would wake me up and I really loved my cat, but I didn't replace it when it died. And that was one of the reasons. Also using cotton, natural bedding has been shown to be helpful.
[16:26 - 16:41] slide 52: Use beds made from natural materials, no metal. Keep arguments out of the bedroom, of course. If you suffer from poor circulation, wear bed socks, as we said.
[16:42 - 17:05] slide 53: Last couple slides here. Now, working with the client, the rest checklist. Help the client establish proper sleep cycles by keeping a sleep schedule, creating a sleep sanctuary, creating calming bedtime routine. Keeping regular mealtimes. Managing stress. Putting exercise into their daily routine. Turning off the TV and computer screens a couple hours before you go to bed.
[17:05 - 17:19] slide 53: Avoid sugar and alcohol over three months. Avoiding coffee and other caffeine-containing beverages. You know, at least, say, don't have them after lunchtime. You'd probably do yourself a big favor if you can't completely avoid them. A lot of people can't and won't.
[17:20 - 17:43] slide 53: So, you know, one cup, two cups, probably going to be okay for those people. If they're waking during the night, also focus on correcting their diet and balancing blood sugar levels. Again, we've said all this many times. The snack before bed. Huge thing to have on your checklist. [slide 54] And if you've measured, and we have every person measured, we have a melatonin from nighttime saliva sample, right?
[17:44 - 18:06] slide 54: And if that's low, consider recommending increased dietary intake of tryptophan. This is found in poultry, seafood, and legumes. Consider recommending mineral supplements or melatonin before bedtime. See supplement module. That's coming up. Educate the client. Many people are negligent about getting enough sleep because they don't understand its importance. And you're going to hear a lot in your practice.
[18:07 - 18:42] slide 54: I sleep fine. Oh, I'm fine on five hours. They might be better than the average person on five hours, but it's going to catch up with them eventually. And if you can just get them to do even an hour more, whatever they're coming to see you for, they’re going to make more improvements faster if they increase their sleep. So, you provide the D.R.E.S.S. guide, and there's some other handouts, I think, are in there. And I always 

provide them with some things to do and have them follow a comprehensive D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success Program because it absolutely works.
[18:43 - 19:04] slide 55: Some reading up on sleep. You guys should be, I think, printing out the slides. So, you have all this, and you have all this. [slide 56] There's a citation for some of the things that I said during this presentation. [slide 57] All right, guys, I absolutely 100% would be listening to the recordings over and over.
[19:04 - 19:06] slide 57: They might even help you sleep.

