# 2021 M7 slides 1-84 6.10.21 1PP
*Converted from: 2021 M7 slides 1-84 6.10.21 1PP.pdf*

---

## Page 1

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to Metabolic Chaos®
and What to do About It
Lesson 1: More Than Just Testing
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
1
1

## Page 2

10-06-2021
3 Easy Steps to Resolving Metabolic Chaos®
1. Assess underlying conditions and contributors to Metabolic Chaos®
Comprehensive investigation including history taking and carefully chosen labs
2. Customize a D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success® Program
Individualized correctiveholistic behavior protocols
3. Run the Program -Health Coaching Process
Coach up function, coach down contributors to MC
Course correct as needed, clients “get better”
Causal factors are resolved (or vital voids are revealed)
2
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
2
2

## Page 3

10-06-2021
Step 1: Sort Out Metabolic Chaos®
Stress and Hormones Panel Metabolic Wellness Panel Mucosal Barrier Assessment
Hormone
Immune
Digestion
Detoxification
Energy Production
Nervous System
GI Pathogen and Microbiome Food Sensitivity Screening
3
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
3
3

## Page 4

10-06-2021
“We identify HIDDEN stressors and risk factors…
Dysbiosis and gut malfunction
Mucosal barrier, biofilm, biotoxins
Poor nutrient breakdown and absorption
Bacteria and yeast overgrowth
HPA axis and adrenal dysfunction
Cortisol dysregulation, circadian rhythm problems
Hormone dynamics and imbalances
Oxidative stress, toxicity
Sluggish liver, detoxification problems
Antigenic overload, pathogenic overgrowth
Inflammation and immunodeficiency
Metabolic Chaos®
… then apply wellness principles” ~ Reed
4
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
4
4

## Page 5

10-06-2021
Step 2. DRESS for Health Success® Program
Apply wellness principles, restore balance and resiliency by address all healing opportunities
Rest
Diet
Exercise
A process so effective
FDN was granted a
Registered Trademark
by the USPTO
Supplementation
Stress Reduction
5
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
5
5

## Page 6

10-06-2021
“We identify HIDDEN stressors and risk factors…
Dysbiosis and gut malfunction
Mucosal barrier, biofilm, biotoxins
Poor nutrient breakdown and absorption
Bacteria and yeast overgrowth
HPA axis and adrenal dysfunction
Cortisol dysregulation, circadian rhythm problems
Hormone dynamics and imbalances
Oxidative Stress, toxicity
Sluggish liver, detoxification problems
Antigenic overload, pathogenic overgrowth
Inflammation, immunodeficiency.
Metabolic Chaos®
… apply wellness principles” ~ Reed
6
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
6
6

## Page 7

10-06-2021
Step 3: Run the Program!
Everyone is different, but most go
through three phases of care
Relief Phase
Corrective Phase
Maintenance Phase
“There is no power boating to health” ~ Reed
7
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
7
7

## Page 8

10-06-2021
Innate Intelligence vs. Metabolic Chaos®
(cid:1)
Coach up balance and resiliency
Known stressors,
HIDDEN stressors,
any and all contributors
to Metabolic Chaos®
Diet
Rest
Exercise
Stress Reduction
Supplements
(cid:2)
Coach down Metabolic Chaos®
8
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
8
8

## Page 9

10-06-2021
FDN Emancipating Paradigms
The “root cause” may never be known… but that’s okay!
It may be undetectable; it may be very far removed from what
one predicts or even measures… but that doesn’t matter!
It may be the result of complexities that cannot be singly
measured or known because it is the product of far
too many interactions… but who cares!
You can have a positive effect upon it
when you know what steps to take
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 9
9
9

## Page 10

10-06-2021
Diet – a Two-Edged Sword
In FDN, we consider diet to be the
number one epigenetic influence. In
other words, if we could only change
one thing in order to help a person feel
or look better, it would be their diet
Not only does diet supply us with
genetically required nutrition, but it
can also be the cause of inflammation
and immune system dysfunction or
imbalances.
The wrong foods are an obvious contributor to Metabolic Chaos®
10
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
10
10

## Page 11

10-06-2021
Conditions Where Food Sensitivities May be a
Major Contributor to Metabolic Chaos®
Gastrointestinal Musculoskeletal
Irritable Bowel Syndrome Fibromyalgia
Functional Diarrhea Inflammatory Arthritis
GERD Dermatological
Crohn’s Disease Atopic Dermatitis
Ulcerative Colitis Hives, Psoriasis
Microscopic/Lymphocytic Colitis Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome Urological
Neurological Interstitial Cystitis
Migraine, ADD/ADHD Endocrine
Autism Spectrum Disorders Obesity
Epilepsy, Depression Gynecological
Insomnia, Restless Leg Syndrome Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
11
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
11
11

## Page 12

10-06-2021
Food Sensitivities and Metabolic Chaos®
Damage from food sensitivity includes blunting the brush border
• microvilli’s ability to secrete enzymes (e.g., lactase and sucrase)
Absorptive cells thus impaired → impairs the ability to break down sugars
Microvilli • enzymes that activate pancreatic enzymes also impaired
(brush border)
Continued consumption of reactive foods leads to…
• Villus atrophy and crypt hyperplasia
Goblet
cells • Damaged blood vessels → impaired protein and carb assimilaNon
• Reduced substances that mycelize fats → poor fat assimilaNon
Blood • Reduced lacteals → poor fat transport
vessel Undifferentiated
• Reduced enterocytes → low SIgA → weakened immunity
cells
• Inflammation of the entire intestinal area
Central
lacteal Resulting in…
Crypt of • Dysbiosis, Candida overgrowth, and proliferation of H pylori or other
Lieberkuhn infections/infestations
• Leaky gut, malnutrition, malabsorption
Villus structure • increase in number of food sensitivities, liver congestion, impaired
immunity, detox capacity
12
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
12
12

## Page 13

10-06-2021
Why Run a Food Sensitivity Test?
Because foods that produce inflammatory responses in an individual are one of the most prevalent “hidden
stressors” contributing to Metabolic Chaos®
Any food can trigger an inflammatory response
Symptoms may be delayed for many hours after ingestion, or a person
may have no noticeable symptoms
Rotation diets are difficult and time consuming
Testing is simple and allows the FDN Practitioner to quickly assess the client’s
diet and make recommendations
“You get a lot of bang for the buck by running a food sensitivity test” ~ Reed
13
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
13
13

## Page 14

10-06-2021
More Than Just Testing
FDN practitioners need to get their clients doing as many “good” things as possible for their body
as possible, and eliminate as many “bad” things as possible...
• There are different types of inflammatory responses, all part of
one’s metabolic individuality
• Reactions may be dose dependent
• Eliminating as many reactive foods as possible will reduce
inflammation and allow function to return to normal
As the clients benefit from eliminating reactive foods, they learn how to
listen to their body, becoming more aware of the effects that foods have
on their health
14
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
14
14

## Page 15

10-06-2021
Food Sensitivity Testing
Food sensitivity testing detects foods and food chemicals that are causing a non-
allergic immune or inflammatory response
Testing typically measures one of two things: levels of antibodies (e.g., IgM, IgG,
IgA) or other evidence of inflammatory response (e.g., mediator release)
All reactive foods must be eliminated from the diet for a
minimum of 90 days, client may choose to
• retest (this is preferable, because as already mentioned,
reactive foods may not produce obvious symptoms, even
though they are doing harm), or
• reintroduce foods one at a time to monitor any
adverse reactions (see How to Reintroduce Foods
Without Retesting later in this lesson)
15
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
15
15

## Page 16

10-06-2021
Applies to Supplements too
Check supplement labels for ingredients identified
as reactive on MRT or other food sensitivity test
• Note: Food sensitivities are not true allergies
(i.e. not IgE-mediated reactions)
• If clients are experiencing allergy-type symptoms
immediately after a meal, they should also have an
allergy test through FDN MDP
• Run an IgE test through ImmunoLaboratories –see
Medical Director Program on FDNconnect
Severe Allergic Reaction
16
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
16
16

## Page 17

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to Metabolic Chaos®
and What to do About It
Lesson 2: Innate/Adaptive Immune System Primer
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
17
17

## Page 18

10-06-2021
Innate/Adaptive Immune Response
The immune system is like a police force that
patrols everywhere, and if it finds a disturbance,
it calls for back-up
The immune system provides two
levels of defense: innate and adaptive
immunity
There are many organs and tissues associated
with the immune system. We will focus on the
cells that provide innate and adaptive immunity
18
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
18
18

## Page 19

10-06-2021
Innate Immune System
Innate immune system is like the cops
that patrol local beats
They take care of most of the criminal activity that
takes place in a community and generally keep the
peace.
Similarly, most of the time our innate immune system
effectively wards off infections by keeping pathogens
in check
19
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
19
19

## Page 20

10-06-2021
Physical Barriers
The top layer of skin cells, known as the
epithelium, is designed so that pathogens
cannot easily get between the cells.
Epithelial cells also line openings into our
bodies, such as the noseand mouthas well as
throughout the respiratory, digestive, and
genital tracts and have additional protective
features
Epithelial cells in these regions are coated with
mucus, a thick, sticky solution that makes it
difficult for pathogens to attach to them. Sneezing, watery eyes, vomiting and diarrhea are
examples of our innate immune system
working to protect us
20
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
20
20

## Page 21

10-06-2021
Chemical Barriers
Mucus provides a physical barrier, but also contains chemicals that help protect us from pathogens
Epithelial cells also secrete chemicals that prevent infection. This is true of epithelial cells on our skin and in our
digestive, respiratory, and genital tracts
Our body also uses chemical factors, such as acid, to create harsh environments for
some pathogens. For example, the stomach has an acidic pH that makes it difficult
for many viruses to survive the journey through the digestive tract.
Fever, although not a chemical barrier, also makes the environment more
difficult for a pathogen to survive while simultaneously enhancing the
immune system’s ability to be effective
21
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
21
21

## Page 22

10-06-2021
Partnerships
As humans evolved, so did the bacteria that live in and on us, resulting in ability to survive on our skin or in our
digestive tract without our immune systems acting to destroy them
Known as commensal bacteria, these “residents” are generally harmless on
our skin but can be troublesome if they get inside. Disturbances may be
minor, such as a pimple but can be deadly, such as a bloodstream infections.
So, our immune systems work to keep commensal bacteria in check
With these bacteria covering the surface of our skin or digestive tract, more
harmful bacteria have less opportunity. Commensal bacteria may release
chemicals that are toxic to other types of bacteria and, in this way the innate
immune system fends off bacteria that would otherwise be a problem
22
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
22
22

## Page 23

10-06-2021
Non-specific cellular responses
A final way that the innate immune system works is through immune
system cells. These cells are not specific in their search for invaders.
The most important cells associated with innate immune responses
are:
Neutrophils—These are the most numerous type of innate immune
responder cells. Their primary job is to destroy pathogens. Neutrophils
circulate in the blood but enter different parts of the body where an
invader has been identified. When a neutrophil finds a pathogen, it
surrounds and ingests it —a process called phagocytosis
Neutrophils only survive a few days
23
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
23
23

## Page 24

10-06-2021
Non-specific cellular responses
Macrophages—Long-lived cells present in virtually all
tissues where they use phagocytosisto trap invaders
found in the tissue
While phagocyticactivity of macrophages is an important
part of innate immunity, these cells are even more
important for activating other parts of the immune
system
(APCs)
24
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
24
24

## Page 25

10-06-2021
Non-specific cellular responses
Macrophages that have ingested a pathogen via phagocytosis
secrete chemical signals, called cytokines, which help recruit
other immune cells to the area —this leads to inflammation.
Inflammation is important for a few reasons
Cytokine releasing macrophages establish an environment in
which immune cells traveling in the blood move into the
affected tissue
And allow for clotting factors to become activated to contain
the infection, and promote tissue repair
Pain, redness and swelling at the site of a wound are indicative of
the inflammatory response induced by macrophages
25
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
25
25

## Page 26

10-06-2021
Non-specific cellular responses
Dendritic cells —These cells have long tentacles and phagocytose
pathogens in tissues. However, the main purpose of dendritic cells
is not to destroy pathogens (like neutrophils) or to alert the
immune system to cause inflammation (like macrophages)
Instead, dendritic cells serve to bridge the innate and adaptive
immune responses
How dendritic cells do this will be described in more detail in the
“adaptive immune system”
26
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
26
26

## Page 27

10-06-2021
Non-specific cellular responses
Natural killer cells (NK cells) work to keep viral infections
from getting too severe while the adaptive immune
system is generating a targeted response (see “adaptive
immune system” )
Unlike neutrophils, macrophages, and dendritic cells —all
of which employ phagocytosis —NK cells attach to an
infected cell and release chemicals into it to kill it
Natural killer cells are also known for their ability to fight
tumor cells.
27
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
27
27

## Page 28

10-06-2021
Innate Immune Response Cells
Neutrophil
phagocytize bacteria, etc.
Macrophage
phagocytize bacteria, etc.
release cytokines, cause inflammation
present the antigen to the adaptive immune system
(APC)
Dendritic cells
phagocytize bacteria, etc. and
present the antigen to the adaptive immune system
(APC)
NK-cells
inject bacteria, viruses, etc. w chemicals to kill it
Innate Immune Cells Go After Anything Non-Self
28
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
28
28

## Page 29

10-06-2021
Adaptive/Acquired Immune Response
When pathogens get past the non-specific mechanisms of protection
afforded by the innate immune system, the adaptive immune system
takes over. Consider the components of adaptive immunity to be the
“special forces”
The “special forces” of the adaptive immune response have two
important jobs:
Stop the current infection
Generate immunologic memory
Memory cells hover in body to stop or lessen the impact of future infections by the same pathogen. If a second
infection occurs at all, it is typically shorter in duration and less severe than a first encounter.
Such “inoculation” allows us to leverage the advantages of immunologic memory after a first encounter
29
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
29
29

## Page 30

10-06-2021
Adaptive Immune Response - Calling in “special forces”
The adaptive immune response is driven by the activities of cells called antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Three cell
types can serve as APCs —dendritic cells, macrophages and B cells
Of these, dendritic cells are the most common and powerful APC type. They are the bridge between the innate
and adaptive immune responses
Dendritic cellsare produced in bone marrow and migrate through blood into tissues where they monitor for
pathogens. When they encounter a pathogen, they phagocytoseit, break it into pieces, and put the pieces on
their surface as a “signal” called antigens, to other immune system components called lymphocytes
Dendritic cells can process and present most types of pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites
and, again, present them to lymphocytes, our T-Cells and B-Cells
30
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
30
30

## Page 31

10-06-2021
T-Cells
Two primary cell types are central to the efforts of the adaptive immune response —T cells and B cells
T cells are important in moderating the adaptive immune response. You can think of them like the police chiefs and
sergeants making sure the appropriate numbers of staff are responding to a situation. Three types of T cells each
have distinct roles:
Helper T cellsoversee cytokine signaling to activate B cellsand increase the efficiency of other
immune cells, such as macrophages
Cytotoxic T cells are important in viral infections in that they kill cells that have been infected by
viruses
Regulatory T cells regulate the immune response, signaling for increased activity early in an
infection, and conversely, signal for decreased response as the infection is brought under
control
.
31
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
31
31

## Page 32

10-06-2021
B-Cells and Antibodies
Once activated, B cellsstart to reproduce, quickly increasing in number. B cells are the troops of officers that
descend on the crime scene, and they are well-armed.
The sole purpose of most B cells is to secrete large quantities ofantibodies. B cells that secrete antibodies are
also known as plasma cells
Antibodies secreted by B cells are a crucial weapon of the adaptive immune response. They are specificfor the
pathogen that is attacking, so they can bind to and neutralize it. Five different classes of antibodies, also known as
immunoglobulins (Ig), exist in people: IgG, IgM, IgA, IgE, and IgD. Each has unique characteristics and roles
IgGis the most abundant and is found in blood and tissues. Four different subcategories of IgG have been
identified. Typical adults have more than 70 grams (or 17 teaspoons) of IgGcirculating in their bloodstream every
day to monitor for pathogens. IgGalso circulates in the spaces between tissues. This is also the type of antibody
that is shared across the placenta during pregnancy.
32
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
32
32

## Page 33

10-06-2021
Additional Antibodies (Ab) secreted by B-Cells
Besides IgG, B-cells also secret IgMwhich also circulates in the blood. IgMis one of the earliest antibody types to
appear during an infection. While these antibodies are specific for the pathogen, they are less effective than IgG
antibodies that appear later during an infection.
Because IgMdoes not leave the blood and enter tissues like IgG but make up the difference with abundance,
traveling in groups, making it more difficult for the pathogen to escape
IgAis found in the blood, but its most important role is protecting mucosal surfaces. IgA antibodiestend to be
found at higher levels in the digestive and respiratory tracts. IgAis also commonly found in breast milk
IgEantibodies are found just below the skin and along blood vessels. They are most effective at combatting
infections caused by parasites. This type of antibody is most associated with allergic reactions
IgDmay have roles in protecting against respiratory infections and preventing our immune system from attacking
our own cells and tissues, known as “self” antigens. IgDis found in the respiratory tract and at low levels in the
blood
33
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
33
33

## Page 34

10-06-2021
Primary Immune Response
Most cells activated during an infection die during or shortly
afterward. However, a small subset of both B and T cells
remain indefinitely. They are called memory cells
Memory cells recognize specific antigens. For example, most
of us have memory B and T cells that monitor our body for
influenza. Whether our first encounter with influenza was an
infection or the result of vaccination, our immune system
became activated and responded to the assault
This first response is called the primary immune response
34
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
34
34

## Page 35

10-06-2021
Secondary Immune Response
The memory B (and T) cells that remain serve as guards
watching for the same specific pathogen to appear again
If it does, these cells will quickly activate allowing the immune
system to produce a faster and more efficient immune
response to this second (or third or fourth, etc.) attack
Immunologic responses driven by memory cells are called
secondary responses
35
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
35
35

## Page 36

10-06-2021
Immune Response Cells
Macrophage
Phagocytize bacteria, etc., release cytokines, cause
inflammation, present the antigen to the adaptive
immune system (APC)
Dendritic cells
Phagocytize bacteria, etc. and present the antigen to the
adaptive immune system (APC)
B-cells
Secrete antibodies that destroy pathogen, some turn into
memory cells
T-Cells
Become T-helper cells to assist cytokines to activate B-cells
Become Cytotoxic T-cells to kill viruses and Memory T-cells
Become Regulatory T-cells to regulate immune response
36
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
36
36

## Page 37

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to Metabolic Chaos®
and What to do About It
Lesson 3: IgG and (Food) Hypersensitivities
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
37
37

## Page 38

10-06-2021
Understanding Antibodies
Together with B and T cells, antibodies (Ab) are the
most important part of the adaptive immune system
An antibody, also known as an immunoglobulin(Ig), is a
large, Y-shaped protein used by immune system to
identify and neutralize foreign objects such as
pathogenic bacteria and viruses
The antibody recognizes a unique molecule of the
pathogen, called an antigen
An antibody can taga microbe or an infected cell for
attack by other parts of the immune system, or can
neutralize it directly
(GAMED)
38
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antibody
38
38

## Page 39

10-06-2021
Understanding Food Sensitivity
Immunoglobulin G (IgG)makes up approximately 75%of serum antibodies in humans, found in blood
circulation to control infection of body tissues. By binding many kinds of pathogens such as viruses,
bacteria, and fungi, IgG protects the body from infection
IgG is also associated with type II and type III (food) hypersensitivity reactions
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immunoglobulin_G#Subclasses 39
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
39
39

## Page 40

10-06-2021
IgG-mediated Reactions
The immune system distinguishes “self” from “non-self” and produces
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodieswhich are released from certain
types of white blood cells called lymphocytes (B-cells)
Antibodies made in response to specific antigensthat may be
exogenous (inhaled, ingested or injected) or endogenous
Structure of an IgG
IgG (1, 2, 3) antibodies to food antigens form large antigen/antibody antibody
complexes called immune complexes that activate complement
proteinsand increase inflammation
“Foods that provoke antibodies are considered antigenic–antibody generating” ~ Reed
http://www.greatplainslaboratory.com/home/eng/brochures/IgG%20Food%20Allergies.pdf
40
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
40
40

## Page 41

10-06-2021
IgG-mediated Reactions
IgG antibodies can be measured in blood/serum and identify the specific antigen (food) that is
provoking them. While modern medicine considers these “normal” reactions, studies have shown
elevated IgG is involved in (food) hypersensitivity reactions
Therefore, IgG food sensitivity testing can be very useful in creating a healthy and supportive
elimination diet
D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success® programs should be
modified using appropriate food sensitivity testing
http://www.greatplainslaboratory.com/home/eng/brochures/IgG%20Food%20Allergies.pdf
41
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
41
41

## Page 42

10-06-2021
GP IgG Food MAP via Serum or DBS
IgG testing by Great Plains can be done
via serum or dried blood spot (DBS)
Reports show reactive foods/antigens
gradiated from low –medium –high
reactivity
Most food test reports contain
summary of reactive foods
Recommend changing diet to only non-
reactive (low) foods
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5004213/ 42
42
42

## Page 43

10-06-2021
Great Plains DBS IgG Test w Candida
Great Plains Laboratory uses enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Measures total IgG (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3,
and IgG4) to 93 food-based antigens and to Candida albicans. Some labs only test IgG4
Dried blood spot collection is easy to do. (5 full circles of blood on the protein saver card)
“The fingerstick test is safe,
convenient, inexpensive and the
preferred test for children when
drawing blood is a challenge” ~
Reed
43
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
43
43

## Page 44

10-06-2021
Fingerstick IgG Tests
GP DBS Test -Markers included on this test:
Dairy
Legumes –beans & peas
Fruits
Grains
Fish
Meat/fowl
Nuts & seeds
Vegetables
Miscellaneous (Candida, sugar, coffee, etc)
Reported as Not Significant, Low, Moderate, High
Elimination of a food from the diet prior to sampling will
reduce the ability of the lab to detect antibodies to that food
Order through the Medical Director Program (on FDNconnect)
44
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
44
44

## Page 45

10-06-2021
Great Plains IgG Test, cont’d
Candida albicans scale
Measures levels of IgG antibodies to Candida albicans1present in all individuals tested
GPC. albicansscale accounts for this and is intended to provide an indication
of clinical significance.2
Elevations (Low, Moderate, High) are an indication that the individual is having
an immune reaction to Candida1
can be due to current infection1
can also persist post-infection, as IgG are memory antibodies -in time, should come down1
Some individuals prone to overreact to a commensal (natural) amounts of Candida -have likely had a
previous Candidainfection but continue to have large reactions to normal amounts. These individuals are
more prone to inflammatory disorders of all types1
1. Bonovich J, The Great Plains Laboratory, Inc. (personal communication, 11-11-15).
2. The Great Plains Laboratory, Inc. IgG Food Allergy Test w/ Candida. Available from
http://www.greatplainslaboratory.com/home/eng/food_allergy_igg.asp
45
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
45
45

## Page 46

10-06-2021
Great Plains C. albicans Test
What to do if Candidaantibody measurement is elevated (Low, Moderate, High)
Remember this may not indicate Candidaovergrowth –may mean client has over-reaction
to normal levels of Candida
FDN must correlate with client’s symptoms and other tests
May also use an Organic Acids test (see Medical Director Program on FDNconnect)
If d-arabinitol or arabinose (depending on the lab) is elevated, Candidaovergrowth is likely
May also use the FLUIDS iQ “Candida Suite” which measures IgM, IgG and IgA to Candida albicans
If client intends to self-treat for Candida, refer to standard Yeast Protocol found in DRESS for Health
Success®Program
46
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
46
46

## Page 47

10-06-2021
Great Plains Sample Test
All foods indicated as having High,
Moderate, or Low reactivity must be
removed from the diet for a minimum
of 90 days .
47
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
47
47

### Table 1

|  | Great Plains Sample Test
All foods indicated as having High,
Moderate, or Low reactivity must be
removed from the diet for a minimum
of 90 days .
47
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 |
| --- | --- |

### Table 2

|  | All foods indicated as having High,
Moderate, or Low reactivity must b
removed from the diet for a minimu
of 90 days . |
| --- | --- |

## Page 48

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to Metabolic Chaos®
and What to do About It
Lesson 4: Mediator Release Food Sensitivity Testing (MRT)
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
48
48

## Page 49

10-06-2021
Food-Induced Inflammatory Reactions
Food antigens, immune complexes (IgG, IgM, IgA to food antigens) and other triggers
such as lectins, trigger various white blood cells (mast cells, neutrophils, monocytes,
eosinophils, and lymphocytes such as B and T cells) to release compounds or mediators
of inflammation (and pain) -cytokines, histamines, prostaglandins, granulocytes, and
others
The release of these mediators can be measured by volumetric changes in blood when
exposed to specific food antigens using a Mediator Release Test (MRT)
Mediator release may or may not produce immediate symptoms, but much damage can
be done to surrounding cells, tissues, and invoke pain receptor activation, smooth
muscle contraction, edema, vascular permeability, excess mucous, neurological
damage, endocrine gland dysfunction, organ damage, gut permeability and more
49
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
49
49

## Page 50

10-06-2021
How Food Sensitivities Cause Inflammation
Source: Oxford Biomedical Technologies,
Inc. http://nowleap.com/food-sensitivity
/how-food-sensitivities-cause-inflammation
Simply put, diet and food-
induced reactions contribute to
Metabolic Chaos® and will
cascade throughout the body, so
that symptoms appear far
removed from ingestion of the
food or substance that started
the ball rolling
50
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
50
50

## Page 51

10-06-2021
Oxford Mediator Release Test (MRT®)
Tests for 170 commonly
consumed foods, food
chemicals and additives
Quantifies inflammatory
response by measuring subtle
volumetric changes in white
blood cell populations in
response to antigen challenge
(the cells reduce in size when
they have released mediators,
changing the ratio of liquid to
solid) Source: Oxford Biomedical Technologies, Inc. http://nowleap.com
/mediator-release-testing/the-patented-mediator-release-test-mrt
51
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
51
51

## Page 52

10-06-2021
MRT Sample Test
Markers included on the MRT®:
• Fruits
• Vegetables
• Grains
• Beans/nuts/legumes
• Seafood
• Meats & poultry
• Dairy
• Chemicals
• Flavor enhancers
• Miscellaneous
Reported as Non-Reactive (green), Moderately
Reactive (yellow), or Reactive (red). Remove
“yellow” and “red” foods from diet for 90 days
52
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
52
52

### Table 1

|  | MRT Sample Test
Markers included on the MRT®:
• Fruits
• Vegetables
• Grains
• Beans/nuts/legumes
• Seafood
• Meats & poultry
• Dairy
• Chemicals
• Flavor enhancers
• Miscellaneous
Reported as Non-Reactive (green), Moderately
Reactive (yellow), or Reactive (red). Remove
“yellow” and “red” foods from diet for 90 days
52
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 |
| --- | --- |

## Page 53

10-06-2021
What Makes a Good Food Sensitivity Test?
A good test will
• Detect very small amounts or
levels of reaction (sensitivity)
• Precisely identify the offending
item (specificity)
A test may not
• identify everytype of reaction the
body may have to a food or
substance
• test for every food the client is
eating and has a reactivity to
No food sensitivity test is 100% but they
have all been very helpful over the years
MRT -Page 2
53
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
53
53

## Page 54

10-06-2021
Implementing or Integrating MRT Results
During the first 2 weeks, eat onlyLow-
Reactive foods and pay attention, see
what you notice!
Low-Reactive foods (green) and food
chemicals may be eaten freely through
the 90 days
Reactive and Moderately Reactive foods
and food chemicals need to be strictly
avoidedfor 90 days, in some cases longer.
In some, forever! Retest at 90 Days is
highly recommended
54
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
54
54

## Page 55

10-06-2021
Integrating MRT Recommendations
How strict do I have to be?
Eating foods from red or yellow list one timecan potentially set you back
weeksin your program
Can I feel worse at first?
Yes, might during the first few days. Headaches, fatigue, moodiness, etc. may
come in the first week of removing offending foods. But be encouraged, these
are withdrawal symptoms that indicate you are moving in the right direction
A natural pain reliever may be used temporarily to take the edge off, but only
if necessary. We do not want to block valuable feedback from the body
Also drink plenty of water!
55
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
55
55

## Page 56

10-06-2021
MRT
Should I take supplements while on the program?
Avoiding non-essential supplements during the early phases of the plan is
recommended, especially if the supplement contains any ingredients on “bad” list
You can reintroduce them one at a time and look for any negative reactions after 3
weeks of avoidance
What about personal care products?
Many products today use extracts from food. Check ingredient labels on everything
including chewing gum, medicine and skin care. Anything that enters your mouth
needs to be approved. Remember, we have access to chemical sensitivity testing
as well (See MDP –Environmental Pollutant Panel), but this only is effective if all
negative foods have been avoided for 90 days
56
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
56
56

## Page 57

10-06-2021
MRT
How long will it take before I notice results?
Most people see results within 1-2 weeks, but it can take as
long as 6 weeks or more. Your results depend on several
factors:
1. How closely you follow the MRT program
Cheating will set you back in your progress
2. How long-standing your condition has been
Sometimes it takes a bit more time to reverse the damage
caused by years of improper eating, inadequate nutrition,
and adverse food reactions
57
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
57
57

## Page 58

10-06-2021
MRT
3. The degree to which food sensitivity plays a role in your condition
Your food sensitivity can either be the direct cause ora contributing factor to your health
problem
4. How much additional gut healing you are doing
Removing inflammatory foods is part of the overall process and aids in healing the gut,
improving digestion, restoring function.
Pay attention to quality of food you eat; “living foods” and avoid “dead foods”
Retesting is normal and should be done as often as
every 3 months
58
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
58
58

## Page 59

10-06-2021
Summary of MRT® & IgG Testing
MRT®
Measures volumetric changes in white blood cell populations (neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils,
lymphocytes) in response to antigen challenge. The food does not need to be in the diet in order to be
detected as reactive.
IgG Testing
Measures levels of IgG antibodies to specific food antigens in the blood sample. Elimination of a food from
the diet prior to sampling will reduce the ability of the lab to detect antibodies to that food.
Which is preferred?
The MRT is our go-to screening for food sensitivities where available and appropriate. Measures
inflammatory response caused by variety of triggering mechanisms, including IgG and other immune
reactions. IgG or (IgA + IgG) testing is an excellent choice when the MRT is unavailableor when blood
draw is difficult (children).
Elevated IgG may or may not lead to an inflammatory reaction. In many cases, you could run both.
59
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
59
59

## Page 60

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to
Metabolic Chaos® and What to do About It
Lesson 5: Can I Work With Kids Too?
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
60
60

## Page 61

10-06-2021
Working w Small Kids
Some of the most rewarding work is done with children
You can run more than one food test
Get kids off all offending foods, including sugary, processed foods
Get them eating whole foods and drinking lots of filtered water
DRESS for Health Success® works on kids quickly
and makes for happy parents too!
“If I could only run one test on a kid, it’d be
a food sensitivity test” ~ Reed
61
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
61
61

## Page 62

10-06-2021
Case Study - Child
2-year-old girl
Main complaints
Constipation
Skin rashes
Ran GI-MAP and Great Plains IgG
62
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
62
62

## Page 63

10-06-2021
GI-MAP Interpretation - Child
GI-MAP screening
Enterobacter –moderate
Correlation
Constipation
Skin rashes
Impression
Enterobacteris likely
overburdening her immune and
detoxification systems.
63
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
63
63

## Page 64

10-06-2021
Great Plains IgG Food MAP - Child
Multiple food
sensitivities
64
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
64
64

## Page 65

10-06-2021
Progression - Child
Recommendations
Removed reactive foods
Biocidin, gelatin, slippery elm, and probiotics to coach up her gut and immune system
Outcome
Constipation and skin rashes cleared up a lot
However, the rash came back
Further investigation
Tested mom for pathogens (GI-MAP), Mom also came back with Enterobacter, recommended
self-treat for mom
65
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
65
65

## Page 66

10-06-2021
GI-MAP Retest - Child
GI-MAP retest
Blastocystis hominis
Correlation
Skin rashes
Impression
She likely was positive for Blasto all along
and it wasn't until the biofilm broke down
that it showed up on the test. (Biocidin
takes a long time to work on Blasto,
especially at the dose safe for a small
child, but this was preferable to the family
over antibiotics.)
66
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
66
66

## Page 67

10-06-2021
Recommendations & Outcome - Child
Recommendations
Continue to avoid reactive foods
Continue Biocidin protocol (also gelatin, slippery elm,
and probiotics to support gut and detoxification)
Outcome
Even though she is still taking Biocidin for Blasto,
bowel movements are great, rashes have not
reappeared in 3 months
Last time the family checked in child had “returned to normal”
67
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
67
67

## Page 68

10-06-2021
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 7: How Food Sensitivities Contribute to Metabolic Chaos®
and What to do About It
Lesson 6: Clinical Aspects/Reintroducing Foods
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
68
68

## Page 69

10-06-2021
Chronic Stress Response
Distress of any kind leads to loss of homeostasis, dysfunction,
dis-ease, Metabolic Chaos®
Weakened state of health, left unchecked leads to symptoms downstream
Treating symptoms only leads to worsening of the underlying dis-ease state
Our job is to look upstream, be a good health detective, include labs to identify opportunities to
restore function, balance and resiliency
Get client to adopt behaviors and therapies that “coach up“ their vital reserve, strategic reserve,
metabolic reserve…
…while we “coach down” contributors to Metabolic Chaos®leading to return of health and vitality,
symptoms disappear
“Symptoms may be far removed from the causal
factors or stressors found upstream” ~ Reed
69
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
69
69

### Table 1

| Chronic Stress Response
Distress of any kind leads to loss of homeostasis, dysfunction,
dis-ease, Metabolic Chaos®
Weakened state of health, left unchecked leads to symptoms downstream
Treating symptoms only leads to worsening of the underlying dis-ease state
Our job is to look upstream, be a good health detective, include labs to identify opportunities to
restore function, balance and resiliency
Get client to adopt behaviors and therapies that “coach up“ their vital reserve, strategic reserve,
metabolic reserve…
…while we “coach down” contributors to Metabolic Chaos®leading to return of health and vitality,
symptoms disappear
“Symptoms may be far removed from the causal
factors or stressors found upstream” ~ Reed
69
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 |  |
| --- | --- |

## Page 70

10-06-2021
Be a Good Health Detective!
Continuous investigation and elimination ofall
blocking factors and hidden stressors
• dietary
• functional
• structural
• M/E
• environmental
• lifestyle
• antigenic
• inflammatory
• pathogenic
70
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
70
70

## Page 71

10-06-2021
The Metabolic Chaos® Cascade
HIDDEN stress and imbalances
if not soon resolved
cascade into other areas
the problem Metabolic Chaos® ensues
individual weak links causing serious dysfunction
metabolic individuality leading to dis-ease and symptoms
how the problem appears or shows up
71
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
71
71
71

## Page 72

10-06-2021
Why Not Treat the Disease?
Leaves too many healing opportunities
unaddressed!
Those opportunities are up in the rapids, and
we’ll be navigating through those with our
functional lab screenings
“As we sort out the Metabolic Chaos® and every identifiable tributary,
we are creating an individualized pathway to balance and resilience” ~ Reed
72
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
72
72

## Page 73

10-06-2021
Customizing DRESS with the MRT & IgG Test
As stated, you get a lot of bang for the buck with food sensitivity testing
Diet and Stress Reduction categories are both fulfilled with one test
Simply remove the offending foods from the diet, especially ones the client eats often
Better, use the “good list” to build healthy meals
Client can use good foods as a shopping list
First three weeks are critical, many symptoms can disappear
Stay off for three months, clear system, or symptoms will reappear
Body will change, sensitivities will change. Improvements expected, but retesting and starting over
is quite common
73
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
73
73

## Page 74

10-06-2021
How to Reintroduce Foods Without Retesting
1. Start with the reactive but “least reactive” item on the food sensitivity test:
For MRT®, this means the yellow category
For Great Plains IgG, this means the least reactive in the Low category
2. Consume a small amount of the item 3 times a day for 3 consecutive days
If no symptoms or unwanted changes occur, food can be reintroduced on a rotation basis,
keep frequency and dose to a minimum
If symptoms occur, eliminate that item from the diet again, moving on to the next “least
reactive” of the remaining foods once symptoms abate
Remember that not all food sensitivity reactions produce obvious symptoms, so
retestingis always going to be the better choice
74
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
74
74

## Page 75

10-06-2021
Food Sensitivity Testing FAQs
What do we do when there are so many reactive foods that a diet plan becomes overly restrictive?
Why isn’t the MRT used in standard medicine?
What is the difference between Metabolic Typing®and MRT®?
How do you implement the diet recommendations you get from the Metabolic Typing®test and the
MRT® test together?
What is FDN’s views on other methods of food sensitivity testing? For example, the EAV (electro-
acupuncture according to Voll) machine and muscle testing
What if my client shows little or no reactivities?
75
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
75
75

## Page 76

10-06-2021
Low Reactivity but Highly Symptomatic
Clients’ results appear to be surprisingly “good” (little or no reactive foods) but you
highly suspect food sensitivities are playing a large role in their health problems
If MRT, check if clients are on immunosuppressant meds (such Humera, anything used for
psoriasis). Also check white blood cell (WBC) count on recent blood work or get it checked
If IgG, were they eating any of the foods checked for? IgG must be “challenged” to be
accurate. As above, if WBC count is low, the body may make less antibodies so IgG food test
may show lower sensitivity than is actually the case. In this situation, it is important to
understand that the food test results are probably much worse than they appear. If available,
check Immunoglobulin (total) at same time
76
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
76
76

## Page 77

10-06-2021
Availability of Food Sensitivity Tests
Oxford Biomedical -Mediator Release Test (MRT®)
Great Plains Laboratory -IgG Food Allergy Test with Candida
FLUIDS iQ offers Total IgG Food Panels for both 24 and 88 foods
Certified FDN Practitioners have access to the following, through MDP:
Vibrant Wellness -Food Sensitivity Test (IgA, IgG)
See MDP for information on the Wheat Zoomer, Dairy Zoomer, etc.
ImmunoLaboratories -BloodPrintOne Test
See MDP for information on IgE and Food Fraction Testing
Cyrex -Array #10 (Multiple Food Immune Reactivity Screen)
Includes cooked vs raw foods
77
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
77
77

## Page 78

10-06-2021
How to Get the MRT®
In the US 47 states (excludes Alaska, Hawaii and New
York) FDN trainees and graduates can order kits directly
from Oxford Biomedical
Call 1-888-669-5327 or email cs@nowleap.com
Make sure you tell them you are an FDN!
There is one 25% Discount Certificate given to each FDN Practitioner (or trainee) per year for
anyone they choose, and additional 10% discounts for eligible staff, and family.
There is no Medical Director Program (MDP) fee for this test!
78
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
78
78

## Page 79

10-06-2021
How to Get the MRT in UK & Europe
In the UK/EU, order viaISO-LABin Poland: isolab@leap.plor + 48 726 400 500
Not available in other countries so don’t try. Even in UK and EU, the shipping is
tricky so consider just sticking with the IgG fingerstick -an excellent choice when
budget and availability of MRT are limited
79
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
79
79

## Page 80

10-06-2021
Food Sensitivity Testing & DRESS for Health Success®
Recommendations
Run the MRT on every client if you can
Otherwise run an IgG Test –GP Fingerstick or Immunolabs
Outcome
The “D” in DRESS is perhaps the most critical element that the client has
complete control over
Running a food sensitivity test also covers “S” in Stress Reduction
in sometimes unfathomable ways
Always run your 5 basic labs on every client, “enroll” them in 90-day programs
Coach up function, while you coach down the contributors to Metabolic Chaos®!
80
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
80
80

## Page 81

10-06-2021
Clinical Outcomes
No guarantees of results
we do not control the outcomes
Reasonable expectations
if we improve function and remove hidden stressors ->client’s health will improve (regardless of their original
chronic-stress related health complaints)
health complaints and even previously diagnosed conditions are simply replaced with normal (or improved)
function and health
Follow D.R.E.S.S.for Health Success® program and be patient
Don’t treat test results, follow protocol
observe outcomes, course correct as needed
stay with the process
The Healing Process
takes time, occurs when all cortisol dysregulation factors have been
removedand all genetically required components of health are provided
Never stop seeking underlying causes!
81
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
81
81

## Page 82

10-06-2021
Where Are You in the FDN Course?
You just finished Module 7!
In Module 7 we went over a the innate and adaptive (acquired) immune systems and how food sensitivities occur. Food sensitivities
cannot be overlooked or underestimated in the search for HIDDEN stressors, dysfunctions and imbalances in a client with Metabolic
Chaos® Added to the hormone markers you already learned to identify in Modules 2 and 3, plus the digestion, detoxification and
oxidative stress markers in Module 4 and the hyperpermeability and gut physiology markers in Module 5, not to mention the foods
that can be tested in Module 7, you are now armed with many tools of assessment and impression forming.
Go on to Modules 8 to learn even more about your client and then you’ll have all the assessment tools you need to get clients
started on an amazing journey. The path you’ll put clients on is virtually guaranteed to help them no matter what their original
complaints may be. Keep up the great work!
For continuing support, remember to visit the FDN Trainee FB Group. Attend the Friday Study Hour every week (zoom) and the
“Friday Call” on BlogtalkRadio. Reed and staff also do a FB live every other week.
Follow the prompts given to you in the written materials in each Module as well as in course emails. If you aren't receiving course
progress-specific emails, contact support@afdnp.com for email troubleshooting.
Do not use the chat box on the FDN Website, please reach your Course Supervisor at support@afdnp.comor
call 877-767-1558extension 4
82
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
82
82

## Page 83

10-06-2021
Practicing FDN
Easy as…
What are the main complaints
Look at underlying causes. test; don’t guess
Always do all 5 labs + Metabolic Typing
Get clinical correlation with test results
Never treat test results (take this for that)
Form your impression
What are the prominent healing opportunities
What’s out of balance or malfunctioning
Can you look deeper for underlying causes?
Refer out for medical oversight
Results & Recommendations
As you apply the general principles of health building and creatively overcome a person’s individual
obstacles to healing, the system that is failing will be revealed… see protocol section…coming soon
© copyright FDN 2008-2021 83
83
83

## Page 84

10-06-2021
FDN Functional Assessments NOT DONE YET
FDN SHP Stress and Hormone Panel
FDN MWP Metabolic Wellness Profile
FDN MBA Mucosal Barrier Assessment
GI Pathogen Screening
MRT -Food Sensitivity Screenings
Metabolic Typing® Diet Test
Follow your personal D.R.E.S.S. for Health Success® Program
The Ultimate Opt-In Self-Care Health Model
84
© copyright FDN 2008-2021
84
84

