Well, hello ladies and gentlemen, let's go over the dress for L6S program. We're gonna start with the D for diet. This is an overview. It'll last a while because it's a pretty thorough overview. And in addition to this, there is available for you additional training on other principles of diet and nutrition. But this is the FDN approach in a nutshell. Okay?
So, the main of nutritional practice is that patient A with L-problem X gets well on protocols Z.
Wonderful. But then you try with patient B with the exact same L-problem X. And you get no change on protocols Z and you wonder.
But you really start to wonder when this patient C with the same L-problem X actually gets worse on protocols Z. Now this, if it has not happened to you, will happen to you.
And it's just the way things go. And here's the deal. The ultimate effect of a food or nutrient or supplement on the body is not dependent on intrinsic value of the food nutrient or supplement.
The variable is the person. This is why I've been after everybody that look, it doesn't matter what the test results say.
Inchensically, there's nothing there. You have to relate it back to the person. So in terms of figuring out what's wrong, it depends on the person.
You know, you look at the test results with the person in mind. We don't treat the paper, we treat the person. Now the other thing to make it a little bit, maybe even more complicated is that you can't use the same protocol in every person either.
Even though they might have the exact same apparent health problem. So I hope I didn't screw that up too bad. Let's move on to figuring this out.
Now the fact is, there's no one diet at all. Throughout evolutionary history, the indigenous peoples in different parts of the world adapted to very different diets depending on the climate, the geography, and whatever plant and animal foods are available to them.
If you're growing up on the steps of Mongolia, whatever they were like back then, things are different.
Then they were on the small island of, let's say, on the island of Borneo. Now we had people living on all these parts of the planet.
And same thing with the geography, they could be at 12,000 feet in the mountains, they could be in the desert, they could live next to the ocean. There's lots of different geographies around.
Most important, of course, would be what would the plants and animal foods, would be available to them for hunting and gathering, what foods would they're hunting and gathering?
So remember, this is evolution. So as a result, we all have different nutrient requirements.
Especially with regards to the macro nutrients, like carbs, proteins, fats, which ones and what ratios become really important.
Now my good buddy, Bill Wolcott, who pretty much wrote the book on diet, says it's these different genetically-based requirements,
to explain why a certain nutrient can cause one person to feel good, have no effect on another, and indeed cause a third person to feel worse.
So let's say that again, because this is really, really critical when you're talking to clients to understand how to talk to them,
say look, man has the ability to adapt, to evolve, to suit his environment over time.
And we're talking millions of years here. The climate, the geography, and what he could hunt and gather locally, determined over time,
his or his group's nutritional requirements. In this sense, you could say that the correct diet for man is bread in the bone,
and no one can escape their genetic inheritance. We can either match our diets to meet the genetic requirements,
or as my friend Bill says, you will pay the paper. So let's do a little historical just for again to give you some good perspective.
The old Stone Age, pay the old means old, lithic means Stone Age.
So let's look at the old Stone Age perspective, the original hunter gatherers, and we're talking about about a 200,000 year history, 200,000 years, that's a long time, modern man.
So of all the bones that could be found, there was no cardiovascular disease diabetes didn't exist, there was no acne cavities,
they had very low infermathetic rates, there was an absence of disease caused bone malformations, and remember most of what we have to look at is their bones.
There's no sign of nutritional deficiencies in those bones, and remember this is a time period that represents 95% of human history.
And these folks, our Paleolithic ancestors, lived longer than Neolithic's, like Uzi, the Ice Man, who I'm going to tell you about next.
On the right there's a picture of South American Paleo, called Paleo Indians, hunting a clip to do it.
Now, they're using, this is like Stone Age, they probably just have pointed sticks, you know, maybe hardened in the fire, they're not using any kind of metal or any of that stuff, and they wiped out the clip to dunce in about 2000 years, once they migrated to South America.
And so we're talking way, pre, you know, last Ice Age. Now, the introduction more or less of civilization came about 10 to 12,000 years ago, depending on where in the world you look.
Well, some Neolithic's are 12,000 years old, some Neolithic's are only 10,000 years old, and Neolithic itself just means new Stone Age. Well, 5,000 years after the beginning of that.
This is basically, after 5,000 years of civilization came Uzi, the Ice Man, and he would be today 5300 years old. So Uzi, the Ice Man is a modern guy. He lives in modern times, basically, in terms of the things going on, socially, you know, with social classes, division of labor, you know, different people doing different jobs, and you had a lot of,
a lot of domestication, a man, a most domestication of vegetables, you know, plants and things like that. Lots of other sort of modern things going on. Modern stressors, if you will, they were smelting copper at this time.
Now, this guy had a copper axe when they found him. You can see the insert there. This is the oldest known natural mummy ever found, never found an intact human body older than this in nature.
And so they learned a lot. I mean, this, if you look up, see the Ice Man, and that's how that's pronounced, see the Ice Man. If you look up, see the Ice Man, like just even Wikipedia, it's a fascinating story.
This guy, it was just full of stuff. He had wheat belly, whipped warm copper and arsenic poisoning. He might have even been the blacksmith or something, or whatever they call it, back into little village or something. His lungs were black, he had bad teeth, he had arthritis. Now, this is very interesting. He was infertile, and he was murdered.
He was an arrow in his back that they could tell, had caused him to bleed out. And we're sure he didn't just, I guess, fell on an arrow. He was murdered.
Now, that's, every boner and stressor you can even think of, almost, you know, that's a, I mean, that's a, covers a bunch of them.
And again, these guys were eating bread made from iron corn wheat and maybe spelt, and these kind of things. That's sort of the bad news. The goodness was, they also drank a lot of beer.
And this guy probably, looking at him drink an awful lot of beer, that of course is an artist rendering of a tea who was about 33 to 35 years old at the time.
Oh, by the way, this guy also had Lyme disease, and it was found in his bones. So, no question about how old Lyme disease is, been around a while.
Amazing. So, we have the original old Stone Age, we have the guy kind of in the middle of the modern age, and then we have the new caveman and cavewoman.
By the way, I should say for the record, and I said this, claim it, when you hear me say modern man, man, I'm talking about mankind, which is just the name for it. Okay, I'm not a sexist or any misogynist or any of that stuff.
So, today, or over the period here, you're going to learn how to determine your own genetic requirements, so that you can be happier and healthier eating a real food, and sister will die at that's right for you.
Now, let's go back to diet. What one thing can cause all this stuff here, hit the pause button, read through these. But it's pretty miraculous.
There are fact, you probably have the slides printed already, you can check them off, you know, but this is what people are coming to us with, right? This is why people show up at it if the end's office.
And at the same time, what one thing can balance the imbalance by the chemistry, maximize the minimized metabolic efficiency, reverse across degenerate disease, and so on.
This choice of maximized minimized hormone production, be the primary stressor or resolve the stressors into some degree, promote or repeat elimination, healers sit down the gut.
I mean, it's just incredible, right? The answer is diet, the DNFDN stressor health success program. So you guys know you're at the right place, they're at the right time, and I'm very excited to present this stuff to you.
So let's figure out what dictates the healthy diet. As we've said, as humans populated in Turglobe, evolutionary forces assured humans survival on local foods, what they get hunt and gather locally.
And these evolutionary forces, their things like adaptation, natural selection, genetic mutation, survival of the fittest would change us, you know, those evolutionary forces that assured we would survive, man can adapt this, we said.
So ancestral diets for indigenous populations evolved over the world in response to differences in geography, climate and local foods available.
Therefore, different paleolithic or ancestral diets evolved for different geographies, different climates and indigenous cultures. So there's no one diet, there's no one paleo diet, there's no one ancestral diet and just to say so if that's true, then food becomes a dual ed sort.
It's your medicine or it can be your poison, the right foods can heal you, the wrong ones can kill you, because foods directly impact and regulate all elements of metabolism.
And let's give Bill another big amen because that's what you're statement.
We're going to get into how, how can foods regulate metabolism? Okay, we're going to get into that. So human bodies designed to be healthy, nutritional elements, nutritional element requirements or just nutritional requirements are part of the genetic program found in the DNA of every cell.
And every cell is pre-programmed. We've gone over this many times. Every cell knows what its job is, knows exactly what to do and how to do it promptly, but only the correct diet allows that genetic or cellular good health program to run to completion.
You've heard me talk about this a lot that there's innate intelligence, there's a good health program that's supposed to run, but it would need what, the right fuel.
So let's take a little bit more historical stuff, you know, 1930's Western price. I think he's the last true scientist to grow in the entire world specifically to study diets in indigenous populations.
And Dr. Prishas travels included studying 14 different indigenous cultures. Again, stop the tape, look at this, or look at your notes. Amazing. This guy got around. Switzerland.
The outer and inner islands of Great Britain. Eskimos in Alaska, Indians in North and South America, proving the Amazonian, the Melanesians and Polynesians of the South Pacific, tribes in Eastern and Central Africa, Aborigines and Australia.
Melanesian tribes in islands of Australia and the Melanesia of New Zealand. I just learned about the Melanesia recently when a graduate of New Zealand was telling me about their native people.
And I asked her who are the natives of New Zealand and they give you any trouble. Just very interesting stuff. So he studied these people and found they did get things like headaches and cold wounds, burns, access.
But they didn't have any cavities, they didn't have emotional problems like depression, they didn't have degenerative diseases, unless they'd strayed from their ancestral diets.
And I'll just say this. He didn't find all of them healthy. He found both of them. He found the ones who had strayed from their diets as much as he found the ones who had not strayed from their ancestral diets.
And it's very interesting looking at the teeth, and to remember Dr. Price was a dentist. So he would look at not just the teeth and carries, but the whole structure of the face and that's why I learned.
And I think I'm going to start with this book. Let's see, my son's 33 years old, but I read this book before he was born. And I remember making sure that my ex, breastfed, my son, because Dr. Price said, if you, if you on breastfeed, then it really makes it a good thing.
It really makes a big difference in the formation of your palate, your heart palate so that you get a nice, and also even your cheekbones, and you're there for your nasal cavities and things like that.
You're just going to be healthier if you're breastfeed. That was a big feature of some of these folks. Something I learned from West and Price.
Last but not least, sort of conclusion, was that the diets were also different. The Swiss ate one thing, the Galic Fisher people ate, what Galic Fisher people ate.
Eskimos, Mayories, Messiah in Africa, the Bantu, the hunter-gatherers of North and South America ate different stuff.
How could they all produce optimum health? Well, the answer is the ate, the right diet for their ancestry. So there's no question in Sisterhood diets are the right diets.
But which one? Well, the rules are, there's no one diet the right or healthy for everyone, and there are no good or bad foods intrinsically good or bad foods.
Except in terms of one's unique metabolic individuality and genetic requirements, the various metabolic and genetic nutritional requirements of different people help define those people.
In other words, those metabolic and genetic nutritional requirements help characterize their different metabolic types.
And pretty sure that's where Bill got that name, metabolic typing from.
So genetic inheritance is the basis for strengths, weaknesses, efficiencies and inefficiencies.
Metabolically, physiologically, biochemically, it's genetic inheritance. And that happens in the cells, in the tissues, in the organs, in the glands, in the systems, and obviously the entire organism.
It's genetic inheritance that establishes metabolic design limits, one's genetic potential, which is a concern.
Like me, I'm not going to ever be a basketball superstar. Why? I don't have the genetic potential to be one. I'm never going to be the swimmer that Michael Phelps is.
Our guys are genetic freak. You just like born to swim. I think he's got web feed or something. That's his genetic potential. But each one of us has inherited genetic potential. And I think that it's our jobs to find out what that is in ourselves and what that is in our clients.
We kind of point them in the right direction. Look, they're design limits, but you inherited them. So you might as well just go with the flow and see what the best you could do is.
So this genetic inheritance dictates individual and the question, nutritional requirements and your metabolic type.
So different metabolic types require different kinds of foods or fuel. There are different kinds of proteins, different kinds of carbohydrates, different kinds of fats, which ones.
We're going to get into it. But you have to realize there are different kinds of proteins and it's just a genetically determined which ones are best for you as it is for the next guy.
So because remember, we sort of evolved in different areas. Obviously, the sources for proteins were different for us because the catch was our South American Indian tribes of Peru, of Bolivia and those places like that down there. There's a certain area where genetically they're called catch was just like, you know, there may be they could be sort of be considered the eskimos of
in terms of ethnicity, like a group like that, but South America. And obviously they'd have different sources of proteins, different types of proteins.
And that's what they grew up on when they grew up evolved on.
Which kinds of carbohydrates, different sources for uskimos and catch was fats, different sources means that evolution created different needs.
Now, if that's true, then it's really should be obvious that there would be different balances of micronutrients.
Remember, you evolved through adaptation, natural selection, survival of the fittest, genetic mutation.
Each group has different nutritional requirements in terms of the micronutrients.
What balance of vitamins, minerals, trace elements, phytonutrients, you know, the antioxidants, the essential fatty acids and things.
That fuel mixture will be different in different types of people, different.
We could only call them metabolic types now, because there were different sources for the eskimos catch was in anyone else you want to know.
And the same thing goes, not only different types of proteins, but different ratios, because the eskimos, it's all they had to eat was protein in fat.
Little seaweed, maybe. Little seasonal nuts and berries or something. Seeds, perhaps.
But otherwise, all seafood. And so their fuel mixture would be different in terms of the micronutrients, different ratios of, you know, calcium to magnesium to whatever other trace they were.
Whatever other trace elements you want to look at. And vitamins you want to look at.
But here we're looking at the macronutrient ratios, the protein fed and carb ratios.
And again, different sources of, and different availability for eskimos in catch was.
Eskimos being obviously very high protein fat and low carb versus the low protein and fat high carb of the catch was.
And each one being pretty stable.
able to reproduce in all these different things.
So different metabolic types require different kinds of foods, different fuel, different balances of nutrients, the micronutrient,
like fuel mixture, and different ratios of protein fed and carbardate, another, we have looking at fuel mixture.
And why these differences matter? Well, hence genetics.
It's, you meet those genetic dictates or else you will create metabolic chaos.
You will contribute to metabolic chaos.
For filling genetically based nutritional requirements produces biochemical balance, metabolic efficiency, optimal function stress resolution, adaptation, regeneration, optimal health.
Failure to meet genetically based nutritional requirements produces biochemical imbalance, metabolic inefficiency, any efficiency.
Loss of function inability to resolve stressors failure to adapt.
It's degenerative diseases, loss of health, death.
So amazing, wrong diet contributes to metabolic chaos.
And you will meet your genetic dictates or again, as Bill says, pay the paper.
No, there's no dilemma because I'm not Eskimo, I'm not Ketsua, I'm not Swiss, I'm not Galic, I'm part Galic, I guess, according to my gene test.
But there's about five other things that makes dinner including the endrothal.
I mean, if you think about the endrothal, you're talking about Paleolithic to the extreme.
Paleolithic means Stone Age.
Now during the Stone Age, by the way, there's actually different species of humans.
And the only ones that survived into the modern air, after past the last ice age were called homo sapiens.
But there was the endrothal's, homo this and homo that.
So now genes form the basis of metabolic individuality and genetic requirements for the right diet and nutrition for each individual.
So genes form the basis of metabolic individuality and genetic requirements for the right diet and nutrition for each individual.
So ancestral is the only way to go.
But knowing your ancestors is not sufficient or even that helpful in selecting the proper diet, because I don't know what they were.
And guess what?
We're in this now, very toxic soup, which even Otsi 5000 years ago proved.
It's only gotten worse.
I think you guys know I've studied the environment pretty well.
Modern world has gotten things all messed up.
Modern transportation, which even back in the day, people were traveling by ship, by horse, by cart, by whatever.
For generations and generations and generations now.
And we're all mixed up.
There's no fixed indigenous cultures hardly left.
I think Western prices visiting some of the last of them that were actually living more of the Stone Age.
And even some of them, again, with the genetic mixing has really jumbled up the soup.
So, and by the way, when we see genetic mixing, we're not talking about your parents and grandparents.
We're talking about all the way back.
Lots of mixing and mixing are mixing going on for millennia now.
So, difference of genetic expression exist even within one family.
It's like genetic rule that.
And how many people do you know who say they're one son?
He eats what we feed him.
He loves it.
He goes out and plays.
He does good in school.
He's energetic and enthusiastic.
Pretty happy.
And the other kid is a slug.
Overweight.
He's the same food.
Doesn't have the energy.
Doesn't have the mental focus and clarity.
Actually, just a different kind of person.
Well, there's reasons for that that we're going to go into.
We're going to show you how to fix it.
But knowing your ancestors doesn't help you much in determining the right diet.
You've got to know more stuff these days.
So, what you've got to know is that is how food regulates metabolism.
You know, we start kind of start out with that.
And we're going to tell you about that.
So, tens of thousands of biochemical reactions take place daily in metabolism.
No biochemical reactions occur independently.
All biochemical reactions are regulated by just a few fundamental homesthetic control mechanisms
or F8Cs.
Now, this makes a lot of sense.
Again, tens of thousands of biochemical reactions taking place.
And they're all regulated by just a few F8Cs.
Fundamental homesthetic controls.
We've all heard of homostasis.
What does that mean?
It means balance within what within a control system.
So, like these are like the executives of a multinational corporation, you know handling all the offices, all the buildings, all the shipping, all the sales, all the everything going on within a multinational corporation.
Just a handful of executive handling all that.
And those F8Cs control all of metabolism.
And these in turn are controlled by food.
Well, that gives us some leverage.
And it's a fantastic thing. So, while this might seem confusing, I want to tell you it's actually pretty easy to do.
And I'm going to keep breaking it down until you get it.
So, what's the nutritional connection between these F8Cs and food? What's the connection?
Every food and every nutrient has a specific stimulatory or inhibitory effect on one or more of the bodies fundamental homesthetic controls.
So, effects of food go far beyond calories.
Food actually regulates metabolism through its effect on the fundamental homesthetic controls.
I promised I would tell you how food regulates metabolism.
It gives us our leverage which tells us what to do and helps us find out what the rate died is.
Now, that bears repeating.
All biochemical reactions, the entirety of metabolism, is governed by a small number of fundamental homesthetic controls.
And every food or nutrient has a stimulatory or inhibitory effect on one side of the other of one or more of the fundamental homesthetic controls.
So, don't you want to know if those F8Cs are? I know you do.
And therefore, the ultimate effect of a food or nutrient on the body is not dependent on intrinsic value of the food or nutrient itself.
Ultimate effect depends on the impact of the food or nutrient on the fundamental homesthetic controls.
For example, a food could be stimulating or sedating or it could be acidifying or alkalineizing.
It wasn't that cool.
It's very cool.
And here are the two fundamental homesthetic controls or control mechanisms that we're going to go over today.
The autonomic nervous system. That's the master regulator of metabolism.
And by the way, you can call the autonomic nervous system the neuroindocrine.
Because it's going on neurologically, it affects the interconnect system and it happens all by itself, sympathetic and perisemputetic.
So, we have these sympathetic and perisemputetic sides of the autonomic nervous system.
We also have carbol oxidative system, which more or less explains interest cellular oxidization, oxidation, or the burning of fuel.
So, it's energy production.
And if you remember, HIDT-E-N, woman immune to dysindiotoxification, energy production, E is energy production.
And here it is. It's, we just simply look at the carbol oxidative system and how food is being burned to help us determine it.
And the N in HIDT-E-N is the nervous system.
And we simply want to know if someone sympathetic or perisemputetic dominant.
So, let's look into these in a little detail.
The neuroindocrine, or autonomic nervous system, is the master regulator of metabolism.
So, it's sort of distributing energy, if you will.
And most people are either sympathetic dominant.
No, it was there pretty much in fight flight, or their parisemputetic dominant, rest and digest.
So, they're either sympathetic or parisemputetic dominant.
If someone is in fight flight, how would you know that?
You know, that's pretty much what we call our A personality.
And they also have some physical features.
Same thing with parisemputetic. They're more or less your rest and digest your laid back.
Parisemputetic.
I think parisemputetics are pretty sympathetic or empathetic.
And some are just pathetic. But anyway, rest and digest.
That's me. Also known as feed and breed.
And this is a basic overview.
And yes, there are people in between. We actually call them balanced.
We hate balanced people.
Kidding.
Let's look at some of the psychological or behavioral tendencies.
If you're sympathetic dominant, you're going to tend towards better concentration,
be highly motivated, cool emotionally, irritable, perhaps hyperactive even,
and socially withdrawn, generally speaking.
Remember, these are psychological behavioral tendencies or characteristics.
The parisemputetic pretty much, let's just say this in their extremes.
This is how they would be.
Again, some people lean a little bit towards the middle on some of these things.
But the extremes would be pretty opposite.
Parisemputetics characterized towards lethargy, procrastination, slow to angle.
Very deliberate, cautious, more warm emotionally and socially much more outgoing,
because they're just chill laid back.
Ask any parisemputetic.
No.
You're going to see how this ties into food.
Let's go with this.
So you'd want to know if you were sympathetic or parisemputetic wouldn't you?
Well, one of the ways to tell us a look at the body.
I mean, you know from behavior what we just went over.
But you can also see that there's some physical tendencies.
The sympathetic side, more indigestion, more harbour and more insomnia, more hypertension,
more high blood pressure, more predisposition to infection, low appetite.
Typically, or let's just say, one character is success very common.
It's angular facial structure, tendency to be taller and thinner.
And that's just the way it is.
Now does that mean there's no tall thin angular face parisemputetics with high blood pressure?
It doesn't mean that we're looking for patterns and tendencies in our business always.
Things to help us form that impression about people, right?
So you're actually looking right here at ways of getting additional impression,
other than just what you see and what you talk to and what they fill out on their intake forms.
So parisemputetic dominance, more diarrhea, you know, so instead of the tighter stools,
maybe in sympathetic side, it should have said constipation, but parisemputetic dominance,
more on the diarrhea side, the allergy side, low blood sugar, your regular harbour chronic fatigue
colds are excessive appetite, round face and skull, shorter, wider build, which, you know,
most, again, parisemputetics are going to just sort of trend that way.
Now let's look at where food comes in, because some nutrients stimulate, strengthen,
or support the sympathetic system.
Well, having an opposite effect on the parisemputetic system.
So let me ask you a question, you see how this person here, there's the autonomic nervous system,
triangle, you have the parisemputetic dominance on the left and the sympathetic dominance on the right.
You can see off the bat that you have more vegetarian tendencies on the right, the mediting tendencies,
or protein types on the left.
Now you see the angle bar there, it's trying to tell you this person is parisemputetic dominant.
You see right there.
So would you want to eat foods that strengthen, support, or stimulate the parisemputetic side?
No, you'd want to eat the foods that basically would swing it down like that.
That wasn't that neat and tricky.
So you'd want to eat foods that actually strengthen the weaker side of the autonomic nervous system.
Now they'll support the stronger side, but they will actually sort of stimulate or strengthen the weaker side of the inespear.
That makes sense.
Eat foods that here again strengthen the sympathetic side.
That's what I should do because I'm a parisemputetic.
If I eat foods that are going to stimulate the parisemputetic side, I get catatonic in a way.
I mean, I'm just already laid back.
So that's the deal on that.
By the same token, let's start with someone here.
Now you can see the bar up here is changed.
The teeter tauter has changed.
And this person is sympathetic dominant.
Obviously, you're going to want to eat foods that would stimulate the parisemputetic side.
And strengthen that side, the weaker side, and bring this person more into balance.
So foods here because foods of the master regulator, metabolism are going to,
and they do that through the fundamental homiescuit and static controls.
You can have the influence on this one, autonomic nervous system.
It's very, very, very cool.
What happens to people when you get emitting the right foods, the micronutrient and macronutrient balances.
So let's look now at the carboxidative system.
We're talking about here again.
It's just burning fuel.
There are different ways your body burns fuel.
There's glycolysis, the cetergasid cycle, beta oxidation.
Many of you have a nutritional background,
and a matter of fact, in the supplemental stuff,
we're going to teach you some things about the crepes cycle, maybe, burning fuel, how that actually works.
But for right now, it just, you know, it works.
There is the burning of fuel to produce a dense, seen tray phosphate, which is energy.
So that's what, so that that's silken to its job.
And that's called just oxidation.
And genetically determined, people are either fast oxidizers,
generally or slow oxidizers, to the have the men between the S we call mixed oxidizers.
But for now, fast oxidizers tend to be more acidic,
require slow burning fuel mixture.
A higher percentage of protein in fat.
The slow oxidizers, you more alkaline types, require fast burning fuel mixture.
And they have a higher percentage of carbohydrates.
And it's bread in the bone.
Remember, you can't escape these realities.
And so this is a fundamental homesteadic control that's, you're either going to work with it,
with your diet, or you're going to work against it with the diet.
This is one of the reasons why there's the wrong diet, and there's the right diet.
It's just an amazing thing.
So here's some of the psychological behavioral characteristics of fast oxidizers.
The alert, white weight, driv and anxious nervous and patient.
It's pretty similar to parasympathetic, say.
Now, we have the slow oxidizers who are more spacing, more drowsy, lack motivations,
or appear that way.
They're more to spread, more patient, good thing.
Hypoactive.
So in their extremes, this is where they are.
Remember, in their extremes, this is how opposite they can be.
They're actually quite similar to the parasympathetics.
And so diet related traits in characteristics of fast oxidizers, lower carbs, higher protein requirements, higher purine requirements.
Purine is a part of protein.
It's a very dense, like very dark meat type protein.
Your organ meats and your sardines and your macrol, and things like that.
They're called high purine proteins.
And there are purines, by the way, in some vegetables, believe it or not.
Anyway, strong appetite to eat often.
They live to eat carnivores.
And a lot like the parasympathetics, as we said.
And the slow oxidizers, higher carbs, low fat, low protein, low-perine, low appetite, if you believe.
But they live to eat to live, it's a terrians.
So these aren't people generally speaking who are addicted to food like I am.
Here's what works with the oxidative system.
Your fast oxidizers, again, more of the meat-eating tendencies, slow oxidizers, more of the vegetarian tendencies.
If you're a fast oxidizer, like here's the teeter-totter leaning over here towards fast, right?
If you're a fast oxidizer, would you want to consume slow or fast burning fuel?
You'd want to eat more slow burning fuel, like fat and protein.
Fat and protein are like the big logs.
See, fast oxidizers are just like a bonfire, right?
Fast oxidizer, a lot of heat, a lot of burning, a lot of oxidizing going on.
Therefore, you'd want to put slow burning fuel, like fat and protein on that.
You can imagine what would happen if I go back a little bit.
Your fast oxidizer and you put fast burning fuel on there, you'd burn up so quick.
You'd be like putting paper on a bonfire, and you don't want to do that.
The typical fast oxidizer, pericimathetic, would be your eschomon.
So if you gave them lettuce or watermelon or something, they're not going to do all on that.
They need slow burning protein in fat, and it's predinabone.
That's an echrochromous dictated or they get sick, and they do get sick on carbs, like virtually, like deadly sick.
So again, you want to eat slow burning fuel with the balance set up.
And by the same token, here we now have some of the teacher taught us leaning over here to slow oxidizer.
The vegetarian tendencies and types.
If you're a slow oxidizer, would you want to consume fast or slow burning fuel?
Obviously, more fast burning fuel, like vegetables, why could you use a slow oxidizer?
And if you ate slow oxidizing fuel, was a slow oxidizer, you wouldn't even burn it.
You're trying to light a tree stump with just one match.
You know, that's not going to work.
So you eat more fast burning fuel, like vegetables.
So this is generally what you need to do up against.
Another thing to consider, and this is what Bill Wolcott figured out, because the previous systems,
the autonomic nervous system and the stimulation of sympathetic and person that set it aside has been known for a long time,
same thing with the oxidative system.
That's just biology and facts, energy production, slower rate, faster rate and things.
That works better around for a long time.
This is what Bill figured out, the dominance factor.
It's good to know if you're a person, a synthetic or sympathetic,
and it's good to know if you're fast or slow oxidizer.
But there are some differences in the food requirements.
Not a lot, but there's enough.
So what you need to know is whether the autonomic nervous system is overwriting the oxidative system,
or if the oxidative system is overwriting the autonomic nervous system.
So here we have some of those both parasympathetic.
You can see the teeter-totter here leaning towards the PE parasympathetic.
Here we have the teeter-totter leaning towards fast oxidative system.
So you'd want to look even deeper into the person and determine where they autonomic dominant or oxidative dominant.
And you would go with that, with you'd go with the diet for that dominant.
So this person is autonomic nervous system dominant, meaning what?
There are nonanomic type, there are parasympathetic.
So yes, you have a strength within autonomic nervous system.
You have a dominance within the ANS, and also a dominance within the oxidative system.
But everyone's going to be either autonomic dominant or oxidative dominant, and you need to know that too.
So this person, you see the leaning towards autonomic nervous system, would call them an autonomic type parasympathetic.
And it's just a total coincidence that these teeter-totters on top of the small triangles are both leaning down on the left.
You can have someone who's a fast oxidizer, but a sympathetic.
You see, so that's the other reason why you need to know which one is dominant, autonomic or the oxidative.
Because that's the diet you pick, you pick the P diet.
So I think I've put your debt went up enough.
And back to this person, a patient A with health promencts gets well in protocol or diet C.
Patient B, same health problem, no change on protocol or diet C.
And patient C, health problem X gets worse on protocol or diet C.
So now you know why?
You eat in cestral of course, but you have to know which one, and if you're making one over, it's going to help you determine that.
So because I'm going to show you how to determine that now, what these dominance is mean and things like that.
Then you'll be able to have full confidence in your diet recommendations, the DNR, just for health success program.
Now, by the way, basic diets would be fast oxidizers, slow oxidizers, sympathetic or parasimothetic.
And it could be some mix, and it could be some balances, as we'll call people who are kind of in between.
And we have set up a website that anyone can go to you, your clients, anyone, and find out what their metabolic type diet is.
This is the official metabolic type test.
And you can find your diet there.
And by the way, if you go there or anyone you know goes there, they always get a free gift, just for health success guidebook.
And here's how we determine if the diet's right for you.
This is part of a diet check record sheet. This is something that's in your documents.
And it's actually a full page eight and a half by 11 sheet. You should print a bunch of them out for your clients.
Or tell your clients to print a bunch of them out. They could print out in black and white or they could print out in color.
It doesn't really matter. It comes out just fine in black and white.
And this is again just the top one third of the eight and a half by 11 sheet.
So it's only showing the breakfast underneath that would be lunch.
And it's going to have these same categories in answer to your exactly.
And under that would be dinner. And again, it'll have all these same places where you can check off good reactions or bad reactions.
So basically, you want to write in the time eight breakfast up here.
Say 930, 837, 3630, whatever time you eight breakfast.
And then you're going to write down what you have for breakfast. So let's say this person we decided was a strong protein type.
You know, that means either a parasympathetic or fast oxidizer.
And the egg steak water coffee for breakfast. Eggs, a lot of protein there.
Steak, a lot of protein there. And fat, a lot of protein and fat, right? And water and coffee just because they can't help themselves.
Now, 90 minutes later, or two hours later, about at the most, they need to, for a short period of time, as you're coaching them up,
to learn if they have a good diet or if the diet's right for them, they need to check for themselves.
If satiety has been met, if they've been satiated, if their appetites gone, satiety is in cravings to do not exist.
So basically, they might check off, oh yeah, I feel full satisfied.
They might check off, I do not have sweet cravings. They might check off, I do not desire more food, I do not feel hungry.
I do not need to snag before my next meal. And they don't have to check off full food. They just got to kind of check off whatever it is.
You know, that's good. Now, so satiety, satiation, which is, are you satisfied? Did the meal satisfy your hunger and eliminate cravings?
And it's a good thing. Now, the next category of response is energy levels. Did it say satiety, satisfied your appetite, and did it? What about your energy levels?
Well, it's person reporting, I have good lasting normal sense of energy. Well, that's what you want. And that's all they got to do is check off something, one of these two choices in energy levels.
Now, in mind emotions well being, we're looking for here is sense of well being.
And this person is checking off that egg-stake water and coffee gives them improved well being, and improvement of clarity and sharpness.
Let's say that's a pretty damn good breakfast that person. If that egg-stake water and coffee work for them, there are very strong protein type.
There are real person, pathetic, and probably a fast oxidizer to double down on their protein. Let's take another one. Let's take someone who, again, right in the time, would be 630 birth.
They're oatmeal, coffee, and energy bar. Right? Now, name and slater, they're going to go, okay, how do I feel? Did that satisfy my appetite, satiety, and in cravings?
Well, they check off, I don't feel, nine minutes later, not satisfied, feeling something was missing. They might have known that right away.
Feel the need for a snack, or for sure, because they did not satisfy their appetite.
Next thing, energy levels, the meal gave them too much or too little energy, and this person that seems private, they would be talking about too little energy.
Or they felt hyper, but exhausted underneath, very common energy ranking for certain meals.
Now, under the sense of well-being, do they have a sense of well-being, mentally, slow sluggish or spacy, inability to focus your conscience and try to. So obviously, not the right meal, right?
So you could do something about that. Let's take a look at what we would do next.
In terms of oxidative balance, or fine tuning, you got someone with meditating tendencies, they're fast oxidizer, typically to that person add more fat and protein.
So you could get them a starting point and tell them, eat 65% protein and fat, and, uh, they would leave, what, 35% carbohydrates.
And I'll tell you how to figure that out in a minute, but if they did that, and they improved, and it sort of shifted them a little bit, like you gave them, you took a fast oxidizer and you gave them some slow burning fat and protein.
It could move them in the right direction. You'd basically, you'd actually be supporting the other side.
You'd support them very well with that kind of diet. Now, you take someone who's the other way, they're a slow oxidizer. You want to definitely add more carbs and move them back the other way.
You want to match the right quality quantity and quality of energy. You definitely want to match the quantity quality and quality of energy with the right amount of protein fat and carbohydrates.
So how do we find tuna? It's just fine-tuning at the top, so let's do some fine-tuning. Six someone who you kind of told them where to start, and you're going to let them experiment a little bit with those diet check record sheets.
If they show up with a couple little red strikes and all by the way, they could have some good and some bad, like they're not quite there yet.
In other words, they checked on the good reactions, but they still had one or two of the bad reactions. So you got this person and you start them off at this percentage.
And then you let them go either way. You could say, "Look, if that's not working exactly for you, I want you to first add in a little more fat and protein."
And look, they go to the green and go down. That's a good word for you. When you hit that sweet spot, it's just right where you got the satiety and association, you got the energy and you've got that sense of well-being.
Now, for the heck of it, they try, "Hmm, I felt great on that. Maybe I'll try a little more fat and protein percentage and they go past and they go, "Ups, nope, nope, not, I'm going to go back to where I was."
Okay, that was perfect. That's kind of like on a radio dial. How we, in the old days, we used to go, you know, turn the knob, you'd go up to the station and it would start to come in to audio range.
And then you'd go past it to make sure you're right at this and then back to where you knew it was great.
So you'd go right towards it, it's at a great. And everyone did this. You'd go past, "U-U, it's getting further away, you backed and you back it up back to where you're doing."
That's the fun and tuning we're talking about doing here. It would work the opposite too. Let's start back at the original place.
And instead of fattin' protein, they said, "I don't feel perfect yet. I'm going to go back and add in a little more cart and then might find that spot right there."
And it just means, "Not going to be far away. It's not going to be down here under the middle. If they're a fast oxidizer, it's going to be real close. It's only a little slight adjustment."
And they might just say to that eggs and steak, add in just a mouthful of last night's cauliflower, whatever they ate that was good vegetable.
And that would actually be an awesome thing to do. Now if they try more carbs, they're going to find that the boobs, it's getting out of range here.
If they try to even more carbs, they'd end up not happy at all. They wouldn't be able to check off anything good on the diet check record.
See, see what I'm saying? So what are they going to do? They're going to go back to that sweet spot, and that pretty much is going to be breakfast.
They're going to have to do this for each meal. So it could be some work, but it doesn't take that long. It only takes three or four or five days to get this totally right.
Breakfast lunch and dinner. And now let's take a look at the autonomic balance. You've got someone here who is pericimathetic dominant.
You don't want to give them foods that are going to stimulate pericimathetic even more. You're going to want to give them things that would sort of strengthen the sympathetic side.
If you're going to actually give them a little bit more fat and protein. Now the sympathetic types, you're going to actually go ahead and take them the other way.
Remember they get more vegetarian tendencies. So you're going to strengthen the paracimathetic side.
You're going to give them that percentage of protein and fat. You're going to have them add a little bit more protein fat. They're going to find that sweet spot by maybe even going a little overboard.
Go a little too much protein and then they're going to get right back to what just works in them. And it works both ways. So,
you know, the more fat and protein you give them, the more it's going to strengthen the other side. That's what pericimathetics need to do.
And add in more carbs, not on the paracimathetic. They're going to find a sweet spot to write it. Okay, perfect. So, no, people are going to say, well percentage would you mean, should I weigh grams? Should I, you know, count calories or something of it? No, percentage based on volume the weight. It looks in your plate.
So do not bother with counting calories or grams or counting anything else. I'll even just look at it. And this is what this obviously a very strong fast oxidizer pericimathetic type meal. You got the seafood there. This is a surfing turf.
And you got beans or lentils here, something like that, also strong in the proteins and stuff and a little bit of carbs. You need your refuge, like your mom said. So, amazing.
I don't know if I could eat that whole meal, even though I'm strong. So my appetites in that big, I wouldn't want it. You know, that's enough for two people from my perspective. But you could eat as much as you can and save the rest of the later. Right.
So we're looking at that again. Pretty easy to figure out. Looks like it might be a carrot in there or something. I don't know if that's part of that seafood lobster tail or what, but looks pretty amazing.
And that's the other meal in there, which is the steak and the broccalini. And then, of course, looks like some squash or something. Right. Now, that might be perfect for a balanced type or someone or maybe someone is a bit of a mixed oxidizer.
But let's say that this is what you get served. This is a good trick. Let's say this is what you get served in your real strong protein type pericimithetic or real strong fast oxidizer. What would you do with this meal?
But you leave something on the plate. What you want to do is look at the plate of food you have. This is the trick. And just, you know, if you're strong protein type, you do all that mean you need to broccalini.
And then you leave most of the stuff you have to judge for yourself what works for you. And you will get to know this real quick. Your body is going to tell you through association, energy level and sense of well being what the right meal for you.
Now, me personally, I have a hard time pushing food away because I know there's all this starving kids in Africa, right? Or wherever they are. And I feel sorry for them. So I better eat all my food. So I would eat all of this.
And that would be wrong from a metabolic type. And that's why you know, I might tend to be pound or two overweight because I can't push food away. And you can't burn it off one off. Plus you add in all the stress levels and things that you have to do with the high cortisol and you get the cortisol driven fast storage and things like that.
So it's in order to correct that you have to double down on these correct percentages. Got that? Okay, amazing.
Now, last couple slides here, testing for metabolic type. And food sensitivity is pretty critical. You can just sort of guess it where someone is. There's actually some question here.
And here's out there for metabolic type. Paul check has one. Bill Wolcott has one in his book called the metabolic typing diet. There are some questionnaires.
And if you fill one of those out, you can figure whether you're protein type or carb type or somewhere in between. And you could use the DCRs to sort of map it out.
I also recommend the food sensitivity testing. We discussed that in another course, but it's can be important. And we provide a customized diet plan focused on eating a very well food diet.
Food that are bad for everyone and foods that they are sensitive. And of course, you want to work with the client to balance blood sugar, which metabolic type diet.
If it's fine tuned, the way we show you, show you how to fine tune it and taking away food sensitivities. Everything else is okay. Then that should balance out their blood sugar really well.
Now, in some of the supplemental nutritional information, we'll show you how to help someone balance the blood sugar. Obviously, as we said, you're going to help tweak the macronutrient ratios using the diet. Check, check record.
If someone needs to avoid sugar, now go home for a while, especially this sugar. Alcohol, the trick with alcohol, if someone just can't put it down right away, they need to get it down to one drink.
And as early in the evening as possible. So if you could have it with dinner, it wouldn't be so bad. If you have it later, you're going to screw your sleep up. So try to have a drink with dinner, glass one with dinner, but don't have two glasses, you know, an hour after dinner or you know, keep drinking after dinner.
And really just, you can get strict if you want. I used to tell my clients, no sugar or alcohol for three months, or I won't work with you. And real mean stuff like that. Because I'm so mean.
Now until you have results of a food sensitivity test, you can do the common avoidance is the most common avoidances are dairy and greens, of course, of course.
And then next would be eggs, soy and corn. Well, corn is kind of a green. So yeah, eggs and soy would be could be added to that. Always insurratic, water intake again in some of the supplemental nutrition training that we have. There's lots of information on water there. What we are trying to do is give you coaching points.
Because whether you're doing this for yourself or you're doing this for, you know, a client, you're going to need to know have ammunition, like answers to questions.
And basically when you're talking about the D diet and you're trying to stick to it or get someone else to stick to it, you need to be educated on like avoiding sugar and alcohol and adequate water intake.
So in some of the other training, we're going to give you plenty of ammunition for that. And all in all, you like always focus on positives with the can eat versus what they cannot. When you get your MT type test results, you look at all the green foods, you know, the foods are color coded generally green good red bad, you know, there's black ones there like they're okay to.
But you focus on what you can eat and the same thing when you get the food sensitivity test and people go, "Oh, look, I can eat asparagus anymore."
You just say, "Well, focus on what you can eat, go shopping for that." And that's the ticket for that.
So when you get down, as I said, rapid it up. The FD and diet guidelines are to use a metabolic typing diet, which means a diet correct with protein type versus carb type versus a mixed type basically. You're going to be a protein type mixed type or carb type.
So you want to follow that strict fine-tune it. Whether you take the MT, the actual MT test or not, you're still going to be either a protein mixture or carb type.
So you're going to do that minus food sensitivities. So the MT diet, your basic diet needs to be fine-tuned with macronutrient ratios and you'll need to eliminate the foods which you have an oral intolerance.
Look at these beautiful meals here. And yet on an MRT test here, on the right, I mean, that looks just delicious to me, except for tomatoes showed up on my bad list one time.
And so tomatoes are night shades. So night shades generally are one of those things you could also avoid sometimes.
And if you're doing a rotation diet, you better rotate night shades out. Tomatoes are our big one.
This other meal here also looks quite delicious. It's a steak in the salad. Plus what? Evil bread.
Man, I love bread. But it's just not good for me. You know, so I can't eat it. And I order in restaurants. No bread, please. Whatever, that's what you have to do.
So, you know, here in this course you've been learning about testing, but you need to know that FDN does a lot more than just testing.
Good practitioners need to get the client doing as many good things for their bodies possible. And eliminate as many bad things.
There are different types of inflammatory responses. They're all part of one's metabolic individuality.
Reactions also might be dose dependent. You could eat a little bit of something. Be okay. You could eat a bunch of something and not be okay. And that's actually pretty common.
And eliminating as many reactive foods as possible will reduce information and allow function to return to normal. We hope. You know, obviously you've got to get everything else straight enough to.
If they have parasites, bacteria, fungus virus, if they have chemical sensitivity, there's lots of things besides food, but it's a huge, huge part of it.
And as the client benefits from eliminating reactive foods, they learn how to listen to their body becoming more aware of the effects that foods have in their health.
And therefore it's going to have a kind of a cascade. They're going to just be more aware of their body.
So getting people to do the tests teaches them something about themselves. Wow, you know, they're starting to pay attention and notice things about their body that they ignored before.
And they'll obviously understand the effect of food has. And that's huge. You know, foods regulating metabolism. Food is causing reactions. Food is very, very powerful medicine.
But by paying attention like this and learning how to listen to your body, they're going to just realize what reactions feel like.
And then they'll notice if they have one to personal care products or to household cleaning products and things like that.
It's very amazing what happens when people learn how to pay attention to their bodies. So that's going to be it for this lesson, this introduction to the diet. There's lots more on it.
I thought I would put this together for you and you get a general overview. Okay, great.
