Okay, let's take a look at fats and they're rolling the body. So we have fats being a tremendous source of energy.
To heat the body, to drive metabolic processes, to move muscles.
They're a component of cells and cell membranes and precursors to molecules.
And precursors for other molecules, like prostate glands, that regulate cell functions, fats cover the nerves, allowing for proper nerve transmission,
fats cushion and insulate internal organs. Sometimes we have a little too much insulation.
And fats are waterproof to skin, believe it or not.
And maybe one of the most important things, you know, far as eating fat and having good fat in our bodies, is that they transport fat soluble vitamins, the ATEK and some others.
Now, fats also increase the absorption of minerals, calcium, magnesium and things like that.
And they provide a feeling of satiety and prolonged digestion. They help slow the release of sugars into the bloodstream.
So I'm trying to give you some tips here. Just things that you'll know that will help you in your clients when it comes to talking about fats, fats are not bad.
So now fatty acids, there's saturated fatty acids and unsaturated fatty acids. There's monolinsaturated, saturated and polyunsaturated.
These are the ones we want to do, omega 3 and omega 6, saturated fats.
Saturated fats are typically the good fats. Typically solid-ed room temperature. Obviously higher the temperature they're going to melt and that kind of a thing.
So here's some information on saturated fats. They're very stable and good for cooking saturated fats.
Sources are examples, butter, meat, fat, egg yolk, cocoa butter, coconut oil, and it says butter there.
Particularly like ghee, which is clarified butter. Saturated fats are considered healthy fats.
Monon research has found that diseases such as cardiovascular disease once thought to be caused by excess saturated fats in the diet are in fact due to two little omega 3 fats.
We're going to omega 3 fats in a minute. So monorone saturated fats. These are considered healthy fats too.
Sources are olives of acados to my favorites. All of avocado oils, various nuts and seeds.
Also found in red meat and home milk. So you can think about this, there's the meat and the butter and the coconut oil and those things.
And then there's still healthy but a stable fats like olives and avocados and nuts and seeds and these kinds of things.
And olive oil, by the way, can be used for light-sutting. However, it's best to saute a stir-fry in water.
Then add the oil before serving for taste and texture. Okay, what does that mean? Well, you know, just what it says.
Although I have also done some deep-frying and olive oil that makes, like if you're going to make chicken picata and I have a great recipe, then you know, you probably want to do olive oil.
And just kind of deep-frying your frying pan using that. You can get it really hot before it starts smoking and all that stuff.
Also, olive and coconut oils should be labeled extra virgin, obtained only organic raw cold pressed oils if you can help it.
Purchasing dark bottles store in the fridge, keep the lid on tight. We don't want them oxidizing light and temperature or the enemy of oils.
Now there's polyunsaturated fats. And there's, they have a different chemical makeup.
There's less saturated fats and they're for less stable and therefore less resistant to spoiling.
Should therefore never be used in cooking instead sauteing water, then add the oil to taste before serving, obtained only organic cold pressed oils and dark bottles as we said store in the fridge, keep the lid on tight.
Now here's probably something a little more important on fats. You may get 3 and you may go 6. These need to be in balance with each other. They are polyunsaturated fats.
There are 11 omega-3 fats in total. Three of which are essential. EPA, DHA and ALA, found in leafy vegetables and flax seed.
From these 3 to body, it can make the other 8. So, in fact, I use an EPA DHA oil almost every day.
It's a great for a little side of energy. These are the creamy oils you can buy. People are making these for supplementation and I think they're great.
Now the important omega-6 fats are the lytic acid, found in bean seed and green oils and the GLA found in e-been primrose oil, boros and black current. These are really good products for hormonal balance and things like that. You'll see in a minute.
There's a raccadonic acid found in animal fat, egg yolks, organ meats and seaweed and D-GLA found in organ meats. So, omega-3, omega-6 is the important fats and each one has little subcomponents if you will. You need to get plenty of EPA DHA and then a balance of these other things.
Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids make prostate glanons which belong to a group of regulatory molecules called oxenoids.
And these prostate glanons play role in the function of every cell in the body and help regulate inflammation.
This is where it gets a little bit technical. It's for those of you who really want the technical stuff. So, there's prostate glanonones and prostate glanontwo and prostate glanontwo.
So, for the record, these are produced from omega-6 fatty acid DGLA. In addition, they make a six fatty acids, little egg acid and gamma little egg acid convert to DGLA in the body and thus increase PGE or prostate glanonone levels.
They work in opposition to prostate glanontwo's promoting an anti-inflammatory response. So, they help to relax blood vessels and help in the prevention of blood platelets clumping together.
Would that be a good thing?
Yeah. So, prostate glanons here, these are regulating inflammation. And they regulate blood fat levels, which is a sense of the control of various conditions like acne, exomarthritis, circulation, menopause, Mitchell cramps and weight.
They have a real immune function, cancer cell reversal, artery protection, brain function regulation, these kinds of things. Processed glanons are pretty cool.
And they are basically a regulatory molecule helping to regulate inflammation. Now, the prostate glanontwo's are produced from omega-6 fatty acid, a raccadonic acid, and they promote an inflammatory response.
That's the construction of blood vessels and clumping together if your blood platelets.
So, this inflammatory response can be a natural and beneficial part of the healing process, or it can be an undesirable response triggered by something other than physical or chemical injury.
And when that happens, when inflammatory response, the prostate glanons, is triggered by something other than physical or chemical injury, such as bad foods or something you're sensitive to, then it would not be a good thing.
So, inflammation isn't all bad, but inflammation in response to something besides physical and chemical injury might be bad.
Now, prostate glanon-3's are produced for the omega-3 fatty acid EPA. In addition, omega-3 fatty acid ALA converts to EPA in the body, and this increases prostate glanon-3 levels.
This promotes an anti-inflammatory response and it helps modulate the effective prostate glanon-2's.
So, you have this interplay between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory prostate glanons, and obviously you'd want a balance, you'd want these things coming into play at the right time in the right place.
And again, basically, in response to damage, like your twist or ankle, you want the right kind of inflammation and the balance with the anti-inflammation response.
But you don't want these things happening in response to things that shouldn't be in your body or shouldn't even be in our environment if you want.
So, again, the prosthetic and the threes promote an anti-inflammatory response, and the healing repair neural circuits in the brain, arteries, heart, digestive, reproductive processes, very, very good anti-inflammatory response.
They play a role in body temperature regulation and calorie loss.
So, fats are good fats to meet things you can't live without fats, people who try to live without fats, who aren't getting the right balance of a mega-3 and a mega-6 fats, that's pretty incredible.
So, for optimal health, prostate glanon-3 needs to be balanced. This can be achieved by balancing your dietary intake of a mega-3 and a mega-6 fatty acids.
Some studies report an ideal ratio of a mega-6, a mega-3 for approximately 1 to 1, and other supportive ratio of 2 to 1, and even up to 4 to 1.
So, this is a problem because the present common ratio in the Western diet is closer to 20 to 1.
And that would be the mega-6 to mega-3, so too much a mega-6. Way too much a mega-6. A more desired ratio can be achieved by replacing some of our dietary mega-6 with the mega-3 fatty acids.
For example, by eating dark oily fish, it places some of the chicken pork or beef, choosing past your fed over green fed meats.
Now, this has been studied over and over again, common. I make all the time to people. They talk about eating red meat, and that's good for you. Yes.
But, green feeding has ruined American beef. It's way too high in a mega-6 because it's not past your fed, or at least a lot of it isn't past your fed.
So, you need to eat the past your fed because that meat will have the Omega-3 in it that you need. Now, we all love our peanuts, but choosing walnut, sesame seeds, flax seeds, punk seeds would be better.
Also, increasing consumption of dark green vegetables. And reducing consumption of processed foods, including fried baked things made with margarine, that kind of stuff.
So, generally speaking, more dark oily fish, past your fed meat, and then walnuts, over peanuts.
And dark green vegetables and not eating processed foods really good, normally great advice anyway, right?
But now you're looking at the why. So, if you're talking to a client, you know, "Hey, I want you to eat a little bit more of this, a little bit more of that," and these things.
Here's why the Omega-6 Omega-3 ratio, plain and simple. It's your anti-inflammatory versus your inflammatory fat fatty acids.
That is an incredible balance in the body. In terms of fat digestion, well, in the mouth, chewing helps separate fats.
And some of them are broken down to do smaller particles, and you get, there is some, what's called lingual lipase or just lipase means, you know, fat enzyme.
It does happen in the mouth. We talked earlier about the mouth having amolase, which helps break down the carbs.
Well, lipase is in there too. When the stomach, the hydrochloric acid frees the fats from the food.
Of the gastric contents, fats are acted upon last. As they rise to the top, they're ever taken along to digesting this way. They set as far as longer.
One fatty acid is removed from each triglyceride by gastric lipase. So there's lipase or a fat breaking enzyme.
In the mouth, there's a fat breaking enzyme in the stomach. And in the small intestine, which is where most of the breakdown of fat happens, they are mostified by bile.
So that enzymes mainly pancreatic lipase can work on the individual triglycerides splitting them into diglycerides, monoglycerides and glycerol.
So when we have cases of gut dysfunction and any other hidden stressor that is interfering with optimal digestion,
having an understanding of the role of hydrochloric acid and digestive enzymes helps us understand why we may need to support digestion with supplements until those things are addressed.
We've said this before and it's true. So your typical better supplements for digestion will include the amolase, which breaks down the carbs, the lipases, which break down the fats.
And the proteases which break down the proteins. And sometimes you might even want some hydrochloric.
So fat absorbs an amolatamplism in the small intestine within the lumen, monoglycerides and fatty acids associated with bile salts or bile, and phospholipids form mice cells,
which travels to the surface of the interocytes and are small enough to fall between the microvoli.
Now the components of fat, the good, you know, the things we want are then released from the mice cells and absorbed across the plasma membrane of the interocytes.
Within the interocytes, monoglycerides and fatty acids, recent the sites into triglycerides.
The triglycerides are packaged along with cholesterol and fat cellulbulvolums into liproprodeenes, or chylo-microns, if you want. The chylo-microns are absorbed into the lacteals of the vialite.
Now I'm actually going to go to another slide right now, just to show you.
Here's a slide I pulled out of presentation that we do, one of the lessons on what happens in the gut when it starts to break down.
But I pulled the slide out of there just to give you a bit of the physiology behind what we're talking about here.
So here's a vialite, little tiny finger, finger-like structure in the lining of the small intestine.
And on that vialite are these interocytes, these are the single cells on the outside of that vialite.
And on the end of those, you see the micro vialite, the brushed border. These are little tiny hairs on the little tiny fingers.
And that's where the enzymes are produced, the ones we've been talking about.
Now when you have inflammation or dyspiosis or food sensitivities or anything coming down through the small intestine, you can get blunted brushed border.
Well that's where the enzymes are produced. So blunted brushed border means low enzymes.
You won't be breaking down your sugars or fats or other things very well.
Low enzymes like maltase, lactase, sucre, so we talked about dextrinase, glucose, amylase.
Now you also get lactose and tolerance into distant can develop. You get reduced my salization of fats and oils.
Like we were just talking about poor fats and oils assimilation.
And that can end up with floating stools and things like that.
Now eventually is the vialite breakdown. You end up with vialisatrophy, cryptopropasia.
The crypt is this area down here. It's called the cryptolubricoon, leabricoon.
And that can actually swell up. So is this crypt, it's the space between the vialite that swells up and the vialite shrinks.
And it ends up just looking flat. You don't have that nice finger like protrusion or anymore.
So back to what I was talking about. You see food diffuses. We talked about it in the last slide. Let me go back to it.
And it talks about here diffusing across the plasma membrane of the entero site.
So right out here is where food actually diffuses through the plasma membrane.
Food gets broken up. So tiny. They can actually diffuse through the cell. That's what you want.
You don't want it going between the cells. That's leaky gut. You want it going through the cell itself.
And it goes here into the middle of the vialite.
And then basically this is just basic until we get into more physiology.
The carbohydrates, they go through these blood vessels. These black lines here are the blood vessels that would carry those food particles off to the liver.
So that's the hepatic portal system. Food comes into the little tiny vialite.
And it goes into the carbohydrates. And the proteins basically go into the these capillaries and over to the liver.
But fat gets absorbed differently. And that's what we're talking about right now. And this little lesson here is the fat.
Now it gets diffused. Once it's micellized, which is it's made really teeny tiny, it can diffuse through that cell.
And it goes into the lacteal. It doesn't go into the capillaries very much.
It tiny bit does. But basically your fat absorption, it's called lymphatic absorption, goes through the lacteals in the little fingers, the little vialite.
And then they get carried into the lymph system. So that is a different system of assimilation than carbohydrates and proteins.
So I wanted you to just look at the physiology here. You can see how teeny and tiny and sensitive this stuff is.
Again, these are your absorbed of cells, the interocytes, food should properly diffuse through them into the heart of the vialite.
And proteins and carbs are going to be absorbed through the capillaries, go right over to the liver.
Fat, most of the fat is going to be absorbed into lacteals and going to the lymph system. So the lymph system does drain into the bloodstream eventually.
And then it will still go through the liver and stuff. But it's just a different way of things getting absorbed is pretty cool. It's very, very cool.
So back to the lesson here. We were right here with the Kylo microns, the liproporties. These are the micellized fats. Just think micellized just means broken up into tiny little particles.
And absorbed into the lacteals of the vialite. So I actually stopped the tapere and went and got that slide and stuck it in there for you. So you'd know a little bit of physiology.
I love the physiology part and in a lot of the lessons you're going to get there's in a lot of ones you've seen, a lot of ones coming up in other parts of this course.
You're going to see a lot of that kind of thing. So now within the lymphatic vessels, the teeny fats, Chalbovile lymph to the vina cavea and then to the heart of the blood supply.
So they do get into the vina cavea is a big vein in the body. Now, by the capillars, these teeny tiny fats deliver the triglycerides to the body cells.
The triglycerides are broken down by an enzyme found in capillary and the thilial cells like the protein life piece. So that is a, and they get broken down and even further into their monoclosures.
It are fatty acids that we've been talking about, which can then pass through the cup of your will be taken up by cells. So it's very interesting how fat gets delivered to the teeny tiny cells to be used in burned as energy.
And here's a lot of sort of gobbledy gook about it. It's pretty important stuff, pretty fascinating stuff to me. There's that slide again and then on to the next slide.
Fat absorption and metabolism continued. So once delivered to the cells fatty acids and glycerol or either used for cellular function like to make energy.
Or to form specific structures such as myelin with this the sheathing around nerves.
Biles saw cell membrane, steroid hormones, etc. Well, steroid hormones. Remember we showed you in a previous lesson that, you know, that's what hormones are made out of. You know, a lot is fat. And then your fat soluble vitamins and things.
So excess fatty acids, monoclosures and glycerol recombined into triglycerides and stored in the fat cells of adipose tissue or as adipose tissue. Adipose tissue means fat.
If blood closest glucose is low, if blood glucose is low, when there are no glycogen stores, liver can synthesize glucose from fats.
Remember, can also synthesize glucose from proteins in that process in each case is called gluconeogenesis. So the liver does that.
And that's how we use fat for energy if blood glucose is low. I think it's pretty close to, okay. Now we're going to talk about some special conditions and special considerations when you're dealing with nutrition and what happens in the body.
And we've said it many times that food riggy leads metabolism and you're finding out the various ways that it does that. And I'm just trying to give you some background and some information that will help you when you're dealing with clients.
You've all heard this term ketones, ketosis and generally when you're burning fat, you're in ketosis. Something you can smell on someone's breath. You know, we wake up in the morning and get that sort of free sweet smelling breath that's ketones and they're vaporizing from the lungs.
It's not always a bad thing and not always a good thing. Now we know that when carbohydrate intake is insufficient to maintain sufficient energy production, deliver, metabolizes fats and proteins in a process called gluconeogenesis, right?
So the liver will make fat and protein into glucose through gluconeogenesis. But there's another thing that could happen to the fats and the liver metabolizes fats to produce ketones and releases them into the bloodstream.
So they can be used by the cells of the body for energy production as well. So it's like associated with gluconeogenesis because it happens in the liver and it is the breakdown of fats to produce something that can be used for energy.
So if ketones accumulate, ketosis large amounts are excreted in the urine and again you can kind of smell it in someone's breath usually. Now too much ketosis can lead to ketoacidosis.
This would change the pH levels. It drops and as you know the lower the pH level, the more acid, so that's what you call a ketoacidosis. It's your two acid based on too much ketones.
It's not good to have low blood pH. I mean it won't go low into acidic really. It's just lower and less base or less alkaline. And so that can lead to bad things.
And in severe cases, you could really sort of suppress the nervous system and die. So what it demonstrates is the importance of determining proper macronutian ratios, reach individual.
Some people do need a higher proportion of carbohydrates and if they don't do that, they're eating too protein fatty. They're going to get into ketosis too much and they're going to get the possibility of ketoacidosis, which is blood pH levels being a little too low.
So you just be careful. No cholesterol. Huge big thing that people are going to ask you about. It's a waxy substance found in most body tissues with high amounts in the liver brain nervous tissue.
And what is it a bad thing? No, it's not a bad thing. It's primarily produced by the body in the liver and in other tissues. And some of it comes from the diet. But very little, the comes from the diet is absorbed. So I know this that the body makes about a gram a day, but you can only consume about a third of a gram a day at the most. So, you know, it's just about all made in the body.
It's carried from the liver to the body cells by low density liproportines. And enzymes in the cell liberate the cholesterol.
So you can be used by the self-reverious functions. This is very important. It's a structural component of the cell membrane. So every cell has its outer membrane. That's made from cholesterol.
It makes steroid hormones as you already know, critical. It is used to make vitamin D for all kinds of things. Bone health immunity, being in a good mood even. And it's a part of making bile salts, which you can't do without. You will not break down fattenums or fat properly if you don't have bile salts.
Other made largely out of cholesterol. No cholesterol is carried back to the liver by high density liproportines where it can be excreted in the bile. And is recirculated by the way.
So you have this idea of cholesterol being used and it will go back to the liver. And then it's going to be excreted in the bile.
It gets recirculated in that interohapetic circulation. It gets absorbed back through the vilae and goes to liver. It's a cool thing. And high levels of LDL on the blood test when indicate that a lot of fats are being distributed to the cells.
But high at ASDL indicates a lot of fats are being taken away from the cells. So you want high ASDL, which one is a proper ratio actually. All right, let's go. Then next slide. Problem with refined oils. Now, there's something else that you want to have at least rudimentary understanding of hydrogenation.
So hydrogenated or hydrogenated, hydrogenated oils bad and involves heating of unsaturated visiboles to high temperatures for a long time. With the catalysts, it's just toxic metal aluminum.
This is what manufacturers do to vegetable oil to make it last a long time. The process says hydrogen atoms to the fatty acids, making them more saturated. In the food industry processes adopted to increase the cell-flave of polyensaturated oils.
So it makes them last in your cell forever. It's why restaurants use it exclusively. They don't want the fats they cook with going bad. They want to be able to ship them around the country and have them last for months or years or whatever on their shelves.
However, it results in converting some of the fatty acids into trans fatty acids. Now those are the bad fats. Those are the worst fats. These trans fats are not easily broken down the body, if at all. And are commonly stored as belly fat or hidden visceral fat around the organs.
They put an extra burden on the liver, they damage cell membranes, they create systemic inflammation, they increase blood cholesterol and LDL cholesterol. And this is interesting. Current labeling law allows nutrition labels to say zero trans fats.
Even if each serving contains up to half a gram of those fats, half a gram is a lot. And it's got 0.4 grams, 0.5 grams per serving. A lot of people eat two or three servings at a time.
grams, grams of this shit. I mean this bad stuff. The problem with refined oils, and we're
talking about other processing methods, using various chemicals, the resultant oils are stripped
of their nutrients like vitamin E, and all these other things, and common sources include
margarine, cellar oil, deep fried foods, and commercially big goods. So these are not necessarily
trans fats, but they're refined to the point where they're bad for you too. Margarine, shortening,
all this stuff. We try not to eat that stuff. And healthy fats are good for you. Healthy fats are good for you.
If tolerated, fresh or cultured, butter, ghee, which is clarified butter, and cream,
from past your fake cows preferably raw, large and ripping from beef fat, lamb fat, goose fat,
duck fat. These should come obviously from pastured animals, not your factory animals.
Cold pressed extra virgin olive oil and avocado oil, unrefined flax seed, and then seed oil,
unrefined coconut oil, fish and curl oil, of course, very good healthy fats. Keep nutting seed oils,
which are high in omega 6 to a minimum. Why? Remember, we don't want the omega 6 to a
omega 3 ratio getting too high. You know, one to one is good, two to one, three to one, four to one.
But if you're eating a ton of omega 6, you're going to get higher than that, and that won't be good for you.
Remember, that regulates inflammation, the pro-inflammatory, and anti-inflammatory,
prostitently, and so healthy fats fill you up and keep your satisfied for longer, or better.
It's some reading and things you need to know about fats, and that's a little bit about fat for you.
Now we're going to see it's gears here a little bit and talk about water, and water's roll,
in key body functions. Well, water is really important. It helps regulate body temperature,
blood pressure, and pH levels. It's a key component of digestive juices. It dissolves minerals,
and water soluble vitamins, and transports them around the body. Now it aids in the release of energy
from food, and that's important. Remember, food regulates metabolism. Water assists. It delivers
oxygen to the cells. It facilitates the movement of feces through the colon, and dissolves
waste and toxins and reduces the burden on the kidneys and the liver, and it's important in the
excretion of waste materials. Moisteness tissues of the mouth, eyes, and nose, lubricates your joints,
and all these different things. It's really critical. Now dehydration is something you want to
completely avoid. The blood becomes viscous. The heart needs to work harder to move the blood around,
and blood circulation becomes less efficient, and the body functions become impaired for sure.
Now common signs and symptoms. If you're dehydrated, you will be thirsty. But remember this. This
is a key axiom, if you're thirsty, you're already dehydrated. You need to drink before you get
thirsty. But you also have sometimes dry skin, dark colored urine, dry mouth, brain fog, headache.
We've cured a lot of people. You know what I mean? A brain fog and headaches, just by hydrating them.
It's amazing what happens when you get your client to just drink more water. They think you're
a genius. Now if it's chronic dehydration, you can end up with increased heart rate, high blood pressure,
muscle cramps, fatigue, dizziness, vomiting, and unconsciousness. Very bad. How much water do you actually
need? I've heard a lot of discussion about this over the years, but a general rule of thumb
for the amount of pure water per day is as follows. In the US, we weigh by the, believe it's the
imperial system. It's half your body weight now, and it's just so if we're 160, divide by two,
it's 80 ounces of pure or purified water per day. The metric system, it's 30 milliliters per kilo,
and it's about the same amount of water either way you look at it. Of course, the actual amount
can differ depending on a variety of factors. Like you're diet. If you're eating a lot of foods that
contain water, you might not need to drink as much. In my fact, I remember there was an old self-help
guru and his whole thing when it came to diet, which is even more foods that contain water.
Interesting. So climate and activity levels also influence the amount of water you need to drink.
So certain health conditions might also affect it. You might have to drink a little bit more
water. You might want to drink a little less, but like let's say you have a urinary tract infection.
You better be flush in yourself out and all these other things here. So one thing you can do is monitor
your urinary volume and output. You should be urinating quite large amounts of light colored
but not colorless urine. Good quality water. Well in spring waters, I drink almost exclusively
spring water. Hopefully it's from areas that are falling in unpluded areas and that way you're going to
get the proper atmospheric gatses and it gets filtered to the soil and rocks, picks up soluble minerals
and things and that would be good. Now glass bottle spring water could be okay, depends on where they
got it from. So you might want to check out the sources for some of these companies you're buying
bottle spring water from and the quality is going to vary a lot. Now purification systems are the
way to go reverse osmosis takes out the chlorine and fluoride and most other stuff that's good.
There's other systems but reverse osmosis is the best. Now in terms of pore quality water,
you're looking at tap water. Tap water, not good. Rain water clicked in cities, not good. It's
got too many pollutants from the air pollution. Any water treated with chlorine and sodium. Again,
this is your tap water, not good. Bott water is better. It's not necessarily free of contaminants
and plastic bottles do leads petrochemicals into the water but it's better than tap water, I think.
Distilled water, you could drink it but remember it's going to pull minerals out of your body because
you still, it has no minerals in it. So you'd need extra minerals. Now alkaline water, people talk
about this all the time. It's all kinds of people selling this. It could neutralize your stomach acid.
It could put a lot of strain on your body's ability to maintain natural pH balance. It does
bind with minerals to form hydroxides, which are caustic, like magnesium hydroxide that can burn
the intestinal well and result in diarrhea and these kind of things. So I don't do those alkaline waters.
And here's some reading for more information in water. I think that's a pretty good overview
right there. So now we're going to go into other beverages like alcohol, my favorite thing to drink.
Now alcohol contributes to metabolic chaos. It's a diuretic contributes to dehydration. Excess,
alcohol stresses the liver, there's no way of answer but it's about that. It depletes your stress
vitamins, all your b vitamins and other things including minerals. It increases zinc absorption
and increases urinary zinc excretion. And the zinc is needed for the production of baits,
seal and lots of other things. So like men they need zinc for their prostate. Well they drink
a lot of alcohol, they lose the zinc. Not good. Over 50% of people drink moderate to high amounts
of alcohol are severely zinc deficient. So men you better take your zinc especially if you drink.
I just made that up. So it can exacerbate symptoms of yeast infection. It can increase blood sugar levels,
which is huge thing, especially in our clients. So it's best avoided by healing. And not a good
thing to be doing a lot of anyway but we generally ask our clients to avoid alcohol for three months.
Can you go drinking for three months? Yes or no. If it's just, that's great. Some people have no
problem. Would it stop me from taking on a client if they said no, I'm not going to quit drinking.
It would depend on how much we'd have to come to an agreement about what you're going to drink and
when you're going to drink it. So I think actually tell you the truth, if they just have to drink,
have some hard liquor with dinner. Early in the night, hard liquor is the least offensive. It's
only one. Now drinking wine all night long, no good. Beer is probably the worst thing because of the
yeast and it's full of gluten and all kinds of stuff like that. No coffee? No matter what kind,
it's not the best way to boost energy levels. It actually contributes to metabolic chaos in these
ways. It's a diuretic. Therefore it's dehydrating. It affects the nervous system. It's estimulate
the causes of liver to release glucose into the bloodstream, contributing to glucose,
imbalance, it's another blood sugar imbalance. Drinking coffee with meals causes gastric,
emptying to soon, which can lead to inflammation, nutrient deficiencies, and things like that.
Now the tanons in coffee interfere with mineral absorption. We consume with the meal, coffee can
reduce iron absorption by 40%. So if you absolutely must have coffee drink it away from meals.
Just drink coffee and don't eat. No, other beverages, soft drink, sport drinks. I should just say,
don't drink them. You can look there, extremely high in sugar, artificial sweeteners,
artificial coloring, flavors, preservatives. They got phosphoric acid, which blocks calcium and
magnesium of drugs and could contribute to kidney stones. Usually contains caffeine, it contributes to
dehydration. Need we say more? Fruit juice. Even natural fruit juices are very high in sugar.
I can't drink them. If consuming fresh juices, it's best to add water so that they would not
consume more fruit toast than you would when eating one piece of fruit. I think these are
worst things we give our kids. Soft drinks and fruit juice really don't contribute much to health.
Now if your thirsty your body needs water, water. Here's something on drinking fluids with meals.
People ask me this all the time, "Hey, I want to take my supplements. I want to take with meals.
I usually wash them down with water. You can take your supplements before meals or you can take
them with the food. I actually like food. Put food in my mouth. I chew it up real good and right
before I'm ready to swallow it. I knock back some supplements in there with it. It makes it really
good. Then you get the normal, they just secretions breaking down those supplements. That's a good thing.
But if you're supposed to take them with water, it's best to do it. About a half an hour before
meal and then wait after a meal for while before you're during more water. It's a good thing to do.
Before I go out to eat or something like that, I was drinking 12 ounces of 16 ounces of water before
but at the time I eat, it's going to be another at least half hour hour. When you're hitting
out the door, every time you hit out the door, drinks some water, big glass of water for you hit the
door to get things to do. Many people drink with meals to get their food down. That just means
you're not chewing their food well enough. They might be dehydrated, not having enough saliva,
things like that. Really good to hydrate well a half hour or more before you eat and that's the
way to do it. So drinking with a meal, subsequently. Good tips. Now here's something on process foods.
The dishes and sugar, sulfides and other preservatives, monosodium glutamate and other flavor
enhancers and food clover. It's a negative of the effect health. Just don't do it. The process
food is crap. Anything in a bag or box probably isn't very good for you. Do I do it sometimes?
Yeah, I'm a nibble but you know, your basic meals have got to be real food. Human body doesn't have
the enzymes necessary to metabolize those things. Doesn't know what to do with them and it doesn't
excrete them very well either. So you've got a lot of toxic load in the body, the more process foods
to eat, the more toxic you are. Some of these substances over stimulator senses too. They're going to
affect the nervous system and therefore we lose our innate ability to determine which foods are safe
and beneficial to eat. They put you out of touch with your body. Don't eat them. Here's something
on pesticides. Really, you can read the slide yourself. The reason I read the slides by the way
when it seems obvious you could just read the slide yourself is because a lot of people and I highly
recommend this are listening to the MP3 files. So you're real smart. If you download from the training
website, the MP3s to your iPhone or to your MP3 player. Put them on a stick. You know, a thumb drive
and play them somewhere. So you do lots of chances to listen over and over and over again. You don't
always have to be watching and following along with the slides. The best thing to do to find out
about pesticides in your food is to go an environmental working group. They put out a list of the
12 foods that contain the most pesticides what they call their dirty dozen. And for those of you
listening, I will read them off. Strawberries, apples, nectarines, peaches, celery, grapes, cherry
spinach tomatoes, bell peppers, cherry tomatoes, and cucumbers. So avoid those dirty, doesn't
and read labels and just know that all processed foods, if they're not organic, they're going to
have herbicides and pesticides. Now the good thing about this is they are detectable. We run a test
through the medical director program all the time. It's called the Environmental Plutin Panel, the
EPP. It's easy to do. You dip a little Clexon strip, like a blotter paper into your and your
peanut cup. You dip your in strip in there and then we can get a report of all the different pollutants
that you have absorbed in your body or at least you're coming out in your urine. And then what you
do from there is you look at what we're coming from. Oh look, styrene, what comes from drinking
out of plastic cups and things like that. So whatever the pollutant is that you find, you track
down the source in your environment and you try to eliminate it. That's a hidden stressor. That's
huge stress reduction that people could go through. There are other chemicals in our food. From
air, well that stuff gets on food and also those same things enter the water supply and chemicals
using agriculture is unbelievable. I've heard as many as 80,000 chemicals are in the environment.
80,000, very few have been tested for safety. Not only that, but they put these on animal feed. So
you know, you are what you eat and you are what you eat eats. And also of course, even in just
packaging, it's going to excrete or leech out into the food that you eat. So if food is in plastic,
cans and boxes and things, you can get that in your body. Again, we can run the EPP and find out
if you've overdone it. So something going genetically into your near food, genetically modified
these sorts of things. There's all different processes involved. And so there are some uncertainties
there. But genetic engineering has a potential to create new allergens, which could cause allergic
relics since some people. The most common to eat foods which are to be avoided are soy corn,
canola, and cotton seed, canola, and cotton seed. We get in the form of oil. But you know, they're selling,
soy and corn that you can go eat that's genetically engineered. And we just don't know enough about it
in my opinion. Again, great place in the very amount of working group. They tell you that 55% of the sugar
produced in the US comes from sugar beats. 95% of that is genetically engineered. 75% of
Hawaiian papaya is genetically engineered. So Kili and Yellow Summersquash are often genetically
engineered. So it's not just a soy and corn, but some of these other things. If in doubt, choose
organic, remember organic. Doesn't always have a lot more nutrients, but has a lot less. If any
herbicides and pesticides and it's never genetically engineered. Now you're also going to be asked
by the radiated foods. And you want to look for that international symbol for radiation or
irradiation. And that they are putting on some foods that you might buy. And you can decide for yourself,
if you want to eat them. But irradiation can deplete B vitamins. Fat soluble vitamins like A&E&D. And irradiation
also alter cell structures. And we do need to do some more studies. But consumption of irradiated
wheat has been suspected of increasing a certain genetic condition where multiple sets of chromosomes
are created in animals and humans. That doesn't sound good. FDA requires it radiated foods show
the international symbol for irradiation. And if you're buying unpackaged foods like we a lot of
us going to food coops and stuff or buy bulk foods, fruits and vegetables, they're supposed to be
some kind of label next to the container. So another is if you're going in there with a scoop and
your puttons, it in the bag yourself, like at a lot of the whole foods places and stuff. If it's
irradiated, it should have a symbol next to the container. The FDA does not require that individual
ingredients in multiple ingredient foods are labeled. Now that's kind of sucks. So if you just
want to sell irradiated food, you mix it with something else then you don't have to label it.
Yeah, it's. Now the best options when buying non-organic, again go with the environmental
working group and look up the clean 15. For those who list thing and we're going to go ahead and read
these off. The clean 15 are the least pesticide herbicide. So organic is always best. But if buying
can eventually grow and produce these foods are your best options. Again, this list varies depending
on the country. But environmental working groups says the clean 15 are avocados, corn, pineapple,
cabbage, sweet peas, onions, asparagus, mangoes, papaya, kiwi, eggplant, yuck, honeydew, grapefruit,
canylob and cauliflower. I don't like cauliflower much either. But there you go, that's the clean 15.
More reading and research you can do here on processed and adulterated foods at these websites
and you can just look them up on your own. So that's amazing and good job on those couple little
sections. Pretty pleased with what we've covered because over the last few lessons you've learned
a lot of things to be able to coach up your clients on. So you don't have to memorize it all,
but you do have a reference there. And when you're coaching them up over the period of a few sessions,
and they ask you a question about diet, you should have a lot of ammunition there. And obviously,
if you don't know the answer to their question, you can get with us, you know, we have forms for that.
So I look forward to working with you guys, making sure you're able to coach up everybody on the
de-for-diet and here we have a question about snacking, can I have a snack? Well, if a snack is needed,
and in the right macronutrient ratios, it would be okay. But if we're eating the right types of food,
right amount of food, and the right macronutrient ratios, there should be no need to snack between
meals. It shouldn't really need to. If you're eating big enough meals and they're spaced, you know,
the right distance apart and these kind of things. Well, I recommend you try to get your
consequences. It's drink water instead. You know, see if a big glass water, it's everyone's dehydrated
anyway. This drink of big glass water, see how that does. And often does the trick. They become hydrated,
and they don't want this snack anymore. The real thing to do is look at the diet's at record sheet,
and look back and see why you do need a snack. What was missing? Well, you know, maybe you didn't
need enough, or maybe you need to enrich the protein, make it a darker protein. You know, what we call
the high periods, a little more, but on the organ meat side or the dark fish or the, um, those kind of things.
Maybe it's the fat content. You need to adjust the fat content. So you really shouldn't need a snack.
If you do drink water instead, and if you absolutely have to snack for some reason, because you
see your workload goes up and down. You never know if you're going to be loading a truck or move. You
know, I don't know, different things. Well, you might need, you know, sooner than you can get to the,
you know, you can't go to the, you got dinner plan for an hour and a half or something that, well,
boy, I can't make it. So, you know, snacks might be appropriate at times like that. So you need to learn
to plan your meals, and if you have to carry real food with you, that was on a drive the other day.
It was going to be four hours on the road and with all the crappy traffic and stuff. So I took in, uh,
I wrapped up some meat and believe it or not, some meatballs, I'd made some custom redavis meatballs,
and they were delicious. They were, you know, just ready to go. That in some water, also,
now a snack is also a, not a small meal. It's a snack. Like there's a picture of a snack. That's a
snack size portion of almonds, of course, if that's in your deal. All right. So, cheat meals. Are they,
okay, generally no, but if the clients make an progress, you could have a cheat meal. What does a cheat
meal? It's either any damn thing you want. I have a fucking pizza, or, uh, I mean, you just sandwich, I don't know.
But cheating means it's so rare that it could be considered cheating. If you cheat once a day,
that's not following the program. You see the difference? So if you were actually doing the program,
I mean, yes, I'm doing the program Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. Friday comes along.
And this is your third or fourth week of the program. And you want to have that first cheat meal.
Yeah, go ahead. But if you're sort of cheating all the time, you can cheat to the point where it's just
not really following the program. You see what I'm trying to say there? So if someone's following the program,
means you're cheating once in a while. But if they're cheating a lot, they're not following the program.
Not enough. Remember, on some of the follow-up sessions you're doing with clients, and you're trying to,
trying to keep them on the program. And you tell them, look, you're cheating so much. Not even doing the
program. So don't be afraid to tell them that. So you can coach them up on these kind of things.
Many people think that as long as they're having a healthy meal, meeting salad, they're thinking
to have a treat wrong. Any nourishment is negated by the treat. You need to consider the overall
medic metabolic effect of each meal. So teach your client how to look at the overall play to food,
including any snacks, desserts, other beverages. Right there I just have a picture of the plate,
but imagine there's, you know, another plate was some dessert, another plate was some fruit juice,
or so then that's not metobocally right. It's the overall effect of the meal. Can't just look at the
plate. Okay, I'm going to eat that meat in that broccalini. But I'll leave the, the starchy
yellow stuff there and then, well, but I'm going to have a glass of juice and then I'm going to have a dessert.
No, you just screwed the whole thing up. That's not allowed. Cheating is doing that,
first of all, you really can't cheat for about three weeks. That's the deal. And by the way,
then you won't want to cheat. People don't want to cheat after three. They're like, no, that's okay. I don't
even want to cheat anymore. Let's talk about maximizing nutrition. Think quality, not quantity.
Eat locally grown organic foods in season when possible. Find out where your farmer's markets are,
go there every week. Eat a variety of food. In fact, you can go there every week. Come home and cook
at all up the same day. Cook for the week. Learn to cook for the week. In, when I'm putting up my barbecue,
I cranked that thing up. I'll make a steak on one side. Some nice, you know, Kibasey of the sausage on the other side.
Throw some weanies on whatever it is. Try to cook a lot. County, County, Esata. I do that pretty often. It's
amazing on salad for me. So do that. Eat a variety of foods in a variety of colors to maximize
intake of micro nutrients. Try to make it pretty. Add herb spices and seasonings. Absolutely,
delicious. Too all foods well. Get your teeth fixed. Limit fluid intake at meal time. Disgusting earlier in this lesson. Indeed.
And eat mindfully and in a relaxed state. As prepared to do some things, but you should try. Not rest,
not stress, not while reading driving or watching TV. Alright, so factors affecting nutrient absorption
fattened diet required for the absorption of all the fat soluble vitamins. Medications can alter
gut bacteria in there for deplete synthesis of certain vitamins. We hate medications. Can't
inhibit absorption by knocking out nutrients from cell receptor sites. Boo can cause excess urinary
excretion. Some do. Some cause the opposite. Alcohol. Generally not a good thing. It's considered
recreational in my opinion. You gotta really save it up for the weekend. To back home, just forget about it.
Can't even talk about that ridiculous. Factors affecting nutrient absorption. Anti-neutrients. So this is where,
we do need to pay attention to some of this stuff. Fightic acid or fight hates bind to minerals in the
digestive tract. Inhibiting absorption of those minerals. It also inhibits the enzymes. Peps and
trips and amolese. Those are things that break down your proteins and your carbohydrates and things.
So fight tastes is even produced by microbes in your gut. So what people learn to do is soak the foods
that contain a lot of fightic acid. Like your legumes nuts and seeds. It's just been done for millennia.
I mean, thousands of years ago, they noticed, "Hey, we don't do so well in this stuff." So maybe we weren't
meant to eat it. But at least what you can do is make sure you do sprouting or fermenting or at least
soaking overnight here. Those kind of things. So another one is oxalic acid. And probably you know,
we just introduced some advanced modules on oxalic testing. But oxalic acid is a natural occurring
thing in certain vegetables. And again, same problem, nice to minerals in the digestive tract,
limiting absorption. So you just have to watch them. That's all. So like if that's all you ate,
probably wouldn't be a good thing. You got to mix your vegetables up. Like we said in the previous
slide, try to get some color. There's been things in there. Next one, more on anti-nutrients,
tanons. These are natural occurring. Well, see in coffee, but also one, things like that. They
also in a fear of mineral absorption. So if all you do is drink tea all day long or coffee all day long,
you're going to have less minerals. You're going to need to make sure you take your minerals.
So you see, I'm not even trying to punish you and say, "Don't eat them." I'm saying, "Learn how to
compensate." Matter of fact, for these deals, the anti-nutrients, if you're doing the products that
contain the fight tastes and the oxalic and the tanons and these sorts of things, make sure you take
your minerals, especially at nighttime. They're very relaxing, generally. That product by a health
has support minerals. Pretty good general product. Over the years, I had clients do very well on that.
Now, Goetrogenic means it can cause coiters and you want to eat rock or citrus. Vegetables,
if you can, broccoli is very good. Cabbage is great. I love steaming cabbage and kale. Also,
I would look for shards. Swiss shards and different red shards and these things shards,
CATRTs are a really good tasting thing I've been doing a lot of. Most cooking methods reduce
but do not eliminate the Goetrogenic effect. Most people I don't think have to worry about this.
Boiling not only leads this Goetrogenic into the cooking water, but brings the food to a temperature
that destroys Goetrogenic properties. Boiling cabbage for just five minutes results in 30% - 35%
loss of Goetrogenic activity and so on. So, if you're hyperthyroid, it's probably best to avoid
non-framinit soy into cook, cook, cruciferous veggies. Yeah, there's more recommended reading.
You can stop the tape right those things down if you want and no inframinitation. You know,
the Western price people are really big on fermented foods and it's generally pretty good stuff.
They are probiotic. They contain many species of beneficial bacteria. It's used in many 18 cultures
to preserve their food. Good to promote digestion and improve health. It converts sugars and
starches to organic acids like glyphic acid. This deserves the food by inhibiting
future-frying bacteria promotes favorable acidic pH in the intestines. It promotes healthy intestinal
flora inhibiting the growth of some undesirable bacteria. It can also potentially enhance mineral
absorption, especially iron, zinc, calcium, copper, and magnesium. It's really important stuff.
So fermented foods. Yeah, some probiotic microbes and fermented foods produce salilase. That's an enzyme.
Brakes don't sell us, which is the fiber makes nutrients more accessible to the bodies. They just
have been enzymes and for many greens, the gooms, nuts, seeds helps to activate. Fight tastes, which is the
enzyme that breaks down in the fightic acid. You want that. East in kombucha will out-compete
Candida. There have been some studies on that. We like kombucha. If you're not fully fermented,
the remaining sugars can be problematic though for some people. Those with blood sugar issues
or Candida are overgrowth. When I'm looking for fermented drinks, and I don't drink them a lot,
but I do like to have them in the house. And just when I'm really in the mood, I go for the
the fizzy stuff. I find them when I'm no sugar. You can find them with zero or one gram per serving.
Things like the Vienneseese 7, 13, 15 grams of sugar. Forget about it. So, also known that those with
Cibo and histid means sensitivity or yeast allergy. Need to limit their intake of fermented foods.
Generally speaking, you can stop the film if you want to write some of this stuff down or just look at
your slides. You probably all have those printed out and everything. And then we're going to talk
about cooking and nutrient availability. Cooking increases bioavailability of many nutrients by breaking
down cellulose. Making the nutrients more accessible to the body states just eventzimes. And that's
really important. And cooking can also result in nutrient losses. That's kind of the bad thing about
a varies depending on temperature, duration, method of cooking. I prefer steaming. Steaming takes a very
short period of time. And it does get them, you know, hot to the point where you're killing any
bacteria or germs on it. Like I rinse off my, I've been eating a lot of sugar. And I love cooking
and charred and asparagus. And by the way, you can throw anything you want on a steam pot and just let
it steam for a while. And you want to do it to about Eldente, you know, you don't want to over
steam. And you can actually look in the water left over and see it's usually green or something.
You know, you are losing some minerals and stuff. But the foods very good, you can throw some butter
and garlic and little sea salt on there, whatever you like. You can also flavor it very heavily.
If you like, you can also take it and mix it in other dishes if you like. But steaming is really,
really good. And if you can learn how to eat cold vegetables and I have no problem with that,
they're great for breakfast, you know, with your breakfast meat and a little bit of your vegetables
from the night before, you know, try to save some. It's amazing. And that's going to be fresh.
And good for you. So that's a little bit about cooking and nutrient and availability. Here's a little
bit more. Mineral is not destroyed by heat, but most are water soluble. So these along with water
soluble vitamins can be lost when discarding the cooking water. To ensure the least minerals are
lost, reduce the surface contact with the water by cutting foods into big chunks instead of small
whenever possible consume the cooking water. Well, I don't even cut my stuff. I steam it whole
and then I cut it later on the plate. That's the way to do it. So cooking in aluminum cookware is
the toxic metal. You shouldn't do that. You should use, like, really good high quality stainless steel
or glass. I also cook in a cast iron. When I'm frying, I use cast iron. But, it's all good. Press
your cooking. I've got a pressure cooker. I ain't that kind of, I'm asking hard to get that thing out
all the time. If you don't keep these things on your kitchen counter, use them a lot. We kind of
a pain. But, making a big meal and bring that thing out. Do a good job. Microwaving is generally bad.
I mean, I've used it to heat up some stuff once in a while, but generally, I don't do any
microwaveing as a rule. Some good references here if you want to look them up. Now here's some good
stuff. All right, tools available available for further customization. You already know about this.
We went over this well in the lesson intro. Talk about metabolic typing, diet, eat right for your
own unique genetic requirements. You and your clients can purchase online question error. Go to mtdide.com.
And also, we have available. Some special diet sheets. Now, these are sheets. You can see how that
when there's made up on the autoimmune diet food list. There's a very well thought out. Things are
easy to hand to the client. There's lots of them. And they're available to you. So they're all customized.
And we put these together for you. This is our stuff. Food sensitivities testing. I like the MRT is our first
line here in the US. You can get it in Canada and United Kingdom Europe. Otherwise, you're going to
end up using a finger stick test, like the Great Plains Laboratory, the IGG test that they have.
It's also got candida marker on it. That's a pretty cool thing. And then there's some special
detesting. This is for troubleshooting later on. These are not first line food sensitivities. But we
do run them. Except maybe that you may mean your labs. When you're working with kids, I usually do the
immunolaps. If they're old enough to get a blood draw out of, you know, if they're three, four, five,
you can get a blood draw out of them. Below that, you want to use the finger stick. But if they're,
you know, old enough to get a blood draw, use the immunolabs, plus the MRT, or the immunolabs,
plus that Great Plains finger stick test. Run them both. You got to eliminate your foods for about
90 days and then some of them can be reintroduced. If it's a genetic thing, like your celiac,
you'll never re-gluten again. So forget about it. Now, this is working with the client and we're
wrapping it up here real soon here. You definitely want to test for food sensitivities as soon as possible.
Provide a customized diet plan, focus on eating, and varied whole food diet, minus foods that are
bad for everyone, and foods to its sensitive. Work with the client to balance blood sugar, use the
glucometer if you need to help them tweak their macronutrient ratios using the diet check
record sheet, and you can tweak which actual foods obviously as well, like different types of proteins,
fats and carbs. And have them avoid sugar in alcohol for three months. Until you have the results
of their food sensitivity test, because I might take them a couple of weeks to get it together,
you can have them just avoid dairy and greens and see how they do. And in sure, adequate water intake,
we talked about when to drink that and help them focus on the positive for the kidney. The last thing I'm
going to hear from client or you is, I don't know, can't eat this, I can't eat that. We'll just
look at the list as if you can't eat and go shopping for that. You provide the client with the following.
The dress for health success, companion guide, the appropriate diet sheets for general healing, and also
the specialty diets, if that's what they're doing. We just went over that a couple of slides ago. We've
got the handouts, and some other things that they can go get or have, but you can find for them. And
hope to that'll be very helpful to you.
