We'll pay in test to give everybody. We're about to begin a very very interesting journey through the Dress for Health Success program.
And you know already that our protocols all fit into the Dress for Health Success system, which is diet rest, exercise stress reduction and supplementation.
Today we're going to give you some diet coaching material for basic results and recommendations sessions.
So this is going to cover all the coaching points that you're going to use on yourself and on your clients if you have any.
And let's just get started here. So the D for diet, our approach obviously is to treat the client holistically and individually based on the concept of biochemical and metabolic individuality.
So there's no two people alike. Each person has unique nutritional requirements dependent upon genetics, physiology, pathology, if they have any environmental factors, medications if they're taking them in psychological factors and of course their own lifestyle.
Now being able to customize dietary recommendations to the needs of the individual increases successful outcomes enhances compliance which also increases their outcomes and empowers the client to be in control and make good dietary choices.
So it's back to you know teach a man to fish and feed him for a lifetime. And there's an old saying one man's food is another man's poison by the Roman philosopher, the creasius.
Now it's been attributed to hypocrites, but that's not true.
Really this may have been a statement more about what's good for one man or one man is not the choice of another. It might have been more philosophical statement than about food per se, but it's good enough for me.
And let's start here with there is no one die for all. And you saw this in the overview perhaps, but throughout the evolutionary history, people in different parts of the world adapted to very different diets, depending on the climate geography and whatever plant animal foods were available to them for hunting and gathering.
Now as a result, we evolved to having different nutrient requirements, especially with regard to the macronutrients that carbohydrates proteins and fats which ones and what ratios, absolutely critical.
And my good buddy, but we'll call it the originator of the original authentic metabolic type of system. He says it's these different genetically-based requirements to explain why a certain nutrient can cause one person to feel good, have no effect on another, and cause a third person to actually feel worse, and it's so true. Let me tell you.
Now the macronutrients are carbohydrates proteins and fats, but there's different kinds and we're going to get into each kind, so that you understand it and so that you can in turn teach your client what they need to know if they need to know it.
So we're going to give you probably more than you need, but that's all good. So the simple carbohydrates complex carbohydrates fiber are the parts that basically carbohydrates mostly that's your plant material proteins are not all like basic difference would be high-perying versus low-perying.
The periods are going to be what make proteins richer. I like to think of them as denser and slower burning or just better for your protein types. High-peryings would be your organ meats and a few vegetables have some periods in the lower-perying would be your white meats and your eggs and things like that.
Now fats are saturated and unsaturated and knowing these things is pretty critical how to get the right amount of carbohydrates proteins fats into every meal.
Every meal, you can't have any meal, this is just one, at least for most of the part.
As well as good quality for this bed quality carbs proteins and fats, so there's some that are better for certain people than others, hopefully we'll be able to convey all of that to you.
So macronutrients, and I might add that this would be versus your micro-nutrients, micro-nutrients of course are the vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients, trace elements and sort of individual things.
So to perform their functions, every cell in the body burns or oxidizes fuel. That's the digested components of your carbs proteins and fats, so digested food is fuel and the cells burn it for energy.
And some people oxidize fuel quickly, it's just the way you're born, and others oxidize fuel slowly and there are others who are kind of in between.
To optimize function, you need to get the fuel mixture, the macronutrient ratio, just right, and this will vary from person to person. People who oxidize fuel quickly, need to eat slower burning fuel, which would be a higher proportion of protein and fats versus the carbs.
And there are people who oxidize fuel slowly, who do better with faster burning fuel, like a higher proportion of carbs of course.
And how do you determine the correct macronutrient ratio for your client? Well, it's pretty interesting. One way we can do it is to educate the client on how to pay attention to their body.
And we use the Diet Check record sheet, which is something I have already demonstrated to you, and is available to you.
Basically, you're looking at the meal in total, like what's on the plate, not an individual food, like meat or the vegetables or whatever it is, but the meal itself, the combined meal you want to look at that in terms of overall metabolic effect.
And after meal, did what you eat provide three things. These are the three things you got to burn your head. This has to roll off your tongue with your clients, so you can tell them what they need to be observing and looking for.
One is the sense of satiety, good solid energy, and a sense of well-being. So, sense of satiety means satisfaction till the next meal, not craving anything and not feeling like something was missing. The good solid energy means no slumps in their energy. They feel like they can get through to the next meal. They feel like they can get some work done, and it's not nervous energy.
Like from drinking coffee or something, with a fatigue underneath that nervousness, it's not that at all. And a solid sense of well-being, happy, not irritated unless you have a reason to be irritated.
Like your wife just came in and yelled at you, that's a good reason to be irritated. But try that or some other reason, you know, you should actually feel uplifted from food.
I know I do, that's why I eat so much. Now, if not, you adjust the American nutrient ratios. That's the place to go.
And you also, of course, can pick different foods, different types of carbs, types of proteins, types of fats and things like that.
But it's the American nutrient ratios. If they eat a high carb low protein meal, try adding more protein and fat.
You know, if they aren't getting those three things, the satiety, the energy, and the well-being. If they eat a high protein low carb meal, try adding more carbahiter, you can add a lot and go, well, that's too much. You know, there's ways again that we're showing you how to fine-tune this and another lesson.
And remember, every meal must contain all of your types of carb protein and fat. The overall metabolic effect is largely dictated by these American nutrient ratios. Metabolic effect means the effect of association, energy, well, being that's the metabolic effect we want.
If you get those three things, then probably foods doing the rest of its job to not always, but that's a basic rule. So that's a very short introduction and we're now going to go and talk about the individual macronutrients.
Alright, so let's talk about these carbohydrates and basically you're going to get those mostly from vegetables, the role in the body, obviously a source of energy, and also a structural component of cell membranes, also a source of fiber.
Some people have a strong, a reddit here in need for a diet, high in carbohydrates, believe it or not. Others tend to burn them too quickly in experience undesirable results, like symptoms of irritability, food cravings, thinking about food a lot and fatigue, and a lot worse by the way.
If you take someone who does burn carbohydrates very quickly, like your classic fast oxidizer, they're going to burn that carbohydrate up, they're not going to have any energy, they're going to be irritable, they won't have association, all kinds of things.
They tend to overeat, they tend to crave more carbs, actually, and their blood sugar gets high, and then they get insulin resistance, and then they get diabetic and overweight, and all kinds of bad things happen. So a little bit on the differences in carbohydrates, there are animal sources of carbohydrates, lactose, and dairy products, for instance.
Interesting thing about dairy is it has protein fat and carbs. Now, they're mostly again plant sources for your simple carbs, fruit, sugar cane, sugar beats, honey, things like that, obviously they taste real sweet, and that you need really good nutrition, not just be vitamins and zinc, but they're important in order to metabolize carbohydrates properly.
And therefore, if you're into many of them, you might deplete your body of some of these things. Isn't that interesting? Do you see the overall metabolic effect of food? It's crazy important.
The two main types of simple carbs are your monosaccharides in your di-saccharides, and one is a single sugar molecule, obviously, and a di-saccharide is two sugar molecules, et cetera, et cetera.
Now, complex carbs, which is what you want to eat more of, would be the ones that have the polysaccharides. These are maybe more of your starches if you're eating some complex carbs.
That's going to have a lot of energy for some people, and then fiber, of course, that's a structural component. There's soluble and insoluble fiber, but anyone to have both, especially some insoluble fiber, things that help clean you out real good,
maintain it, that bulk, it's really important. And basically, you're looking at chains of carbohydrates.
So it's not simple. The monosaccharides are the di-saccharides, they're longer chains called polysaccharides. All right, enough about that.
Now, in digestion of carbohydrates, it starts in the mouth, because starch is broken down into smaller chains of sugars by the enzyme, celavary amylase.
So amylase is very important. You know, just even seeing food starts to digest the process. You see it, you smell it. And that saliva starts ruining, right? Well, that starts to break down.
And then in the stomach, you're hydrochloric acid breaks down cell walls, plant-based foods, and then in the small intestine, you get the rest of digestion. The digestion happens. Starting, actually starting with seeing and smelling food, chewing the food, and then the HCL, and other things in the stomach, and then in the small intestine, it breaks down. So that's your digestion. No assimilation is how well it's broken down and getting absorbed into the body.
So digestion is breaking down. Happens in the mouth, the stomach, and partly in the small intestine, which is where assimilation also takes place. Now, in the small intestine, the oligo-saccharides, these sugars, these sort of middle processed, you know, somewhat processed sugars.
They get broken down further by pancreatic amylase, which is another type of enzyme, and also by what we call the brush border enzymes. Now, we go into the brush border and the fill eye and these things, an awful lot when we're talking about leaky gut and these things, other lessons.
But it's important to know some of these things. Disaccharides are broken down into simple sugars by the brush border enzymes. Incredibly important aren't they? Those brush border enzymes.
Brush border, or they're the little tiny hairs on the fill eye, we call them micro fill eye or brush border, same thing. And those are things like lactase, sucrease, maltase, these are things that break down lactose sucrose, maltose, whatever it might be.
So, when we have cases that gut dysfunction, or any other hidden stressor that is interfering with the optimal digestion, having understanding of the role of each cell and digestive enzymes, helps us understand why we may need to support digestion with supplements and tell those things you're addressed.
So, you know, one of the main supplements that we do use when we get to that is going to be digestive enzymes, even HCl. Well, why? Well, because your body's all jacked up and you're not getting the proper breakdown of your food, so you could be malnourished.
Anyway, so it's important to get some of that here. Carbohydrate absorption, this is the assimilation part I was talking about. In the small intestine, these small saccharides, these simple sugars, pass into the blood capillaries through the fill eye.
And then they travel in the bloodstream from the small intestine to the liver. You know, everything goes into that. So, the hepatic portal system. Again, we go into the physiology of that a lot when we're actually looking at the damage that gets done to the small intestine.
And then the other simple sugars are converted by the liver to glucose to be used in the body. Glucose is the fuel that we use in our bodies. Okay. So, more on carbohydrate metabolism.
So, glucose is what is sort of the end result that your body can actually use. When glucose levels rise, the pancuser creates insulin, which signals the body cells to take up glucose.
So, insulin unlocks the cells, so glucose can get in and be used for energy production. Once in the cells, glucose is used in the process of cellular respiration to produce denocene triphosphate ATP.
That actually is the energy. It says there's stores the energy needed for cellular activity. Yeah. So, production at ATP, that's the production of energy basically.
Any excess glucose is either converted to glycogen and stored in the liver and skeletal muscles or converted to fat and stored in atopostation, the conversion of fat that would be your triglycerides.
Now, the glycogen stored in the muscle cells serves as an immediate reserve of available glucose for those cells. That's cool.
So, it's glucose that gets used by the cells, allowed into the cells by insulin to produce energy, and excess is stored as glycogen basically or as it can be converted to triglycerides which gets stored as fat.
Now, fructose is another quality of sugar, as we went over. If you do a large amount of fructose, like from fruit or even table sugars, half fructose, if that's consumed all at once, at least the third of that is converted to glucose by the liver.
At least one third of that converted glucose by the liver is directly converted to fat. No, that's a lot. So, fructose, a third of that is going to get converted to fat basically.
Existored toast can also interfere with leptin. We'll look at that later, maybe. That's a hormone that regulates appetite.
So, a critical thing for us, technical things inside, is blood sugar balance. If blood sugar levels are too low, the person may feel weak and dizzy, like hypo glycemia.
If it's too high, the person may experience drowsiness and vomiting, hyper glycemia. We won't see that a lot, but it's possible.
To maintain homeostasis, the body strives to maintain balance levels of blood sugar, of course. Now, this is important.
When blood glucose levels drop, the pancreas halts its secretion of insulin and releases glucose on instead.
And that hormone glucose, on signals to liver, to convert glycogen, which is its stored form, to glucose, the useful form. That's a process called glycogenolysis.
And obviously, it would release it into the bloodstream. So, it's a backup system for maintaining blood sugar levels.
And if there are no glycogen stores from overexercise or something like that, the liver will still make some glucose, but it makes it out of fats and amino acids in a process called gluconeotinuses.
And that's a cool thing. You know, this blood sugar balance idea.
So, when blood glucose levels rise, the pancreas halts its secretion of glucone and releases insulin. That, of course, is a hormone that signals the body cells and the liver to take up glucose from the blood.
Remember, it's always glucose, the useful form. And the liver converts the glucose to glycogen for storage again. So, the body is storing glucose as glycogen.
And it is turning glycogen back into glucose in these various balancing methods, pretty cool. And this is obviously a very cyclic process.
Now, my good buddy, Bill, once again says that blood sugar dysregulation can be a primary stressor, absolutely major stressor. And we'll force hormone defense for failure to provide regulation from food.
Chronic hormone compensation leads to a adrenal dysfunction, and a loan can cause dysfunction to any process regulated by the adrenal glands. Oh yeah. Now, factors influencing blood sugar balance. So, the stress response, for example, epinephrine, which is your adrenaline, that stimulates the breakdown of glycogen into glucose.
Remember, glycogen is a stored form, break it down into glucose to raise blood sugar levels. So, stress response will increase glycogen analysis, and it will also increase gluconeogenesis.
And if the stress response is activated too often, maintaining blood sugar balance becomes more difficult. Well, that's why people with a lot of stress stress response, they're having blood sugar imbalance, which is why what we do is if the ins, it's helping balance that.
So, there's a glycemic response, what does that mean? glycemic. That's how fast glucose is absorbed from a meal. So, there's a glycemic index to foods basically. So, some foods are high glycemic index, some foods are lower glycemic index.
The higher the glycemic index, the faster the glucose is absorbed from a meal, and that also dictates how high blood glucose rises, and how quickly it returns to normal. So, low glycemic response is the ideal that slow glucose absorption with only a small rise in blood glucose, and a smooth return to normal levels.
So, that's what you want, a low glycemic response. A high glycemic response is an unhealthy response. Rappaglucous absorption, surgeon blood glucose, followed by glucose levels, plunging to below normal. Obviously, that would be because insulin kicks in and lowers it. But that's, you know, you want the low glycemic response.
Other factors influencing blood sugar balance. glycemic response is influenced by glycemic index, as we just said in glycemic load, glycemic index, a rate at which carbohydrates are broken down into glucose, pure glucose, has a glycemic index of 100.
The lower the number, the lesser blood sugar is spiked, and the longer our hunger is kept at bay. Good thing. Now, the only thing wrong with the glycemic index is that it doesn't take into account the non-carb portion of food.
Watermelon has a glycemic index of 72, but it's mostly water, only 7% carb. Bread has a glycemic index of about 72, but it's 50% carb. So, it makes a difference about the food is.
glycemic load is the amount of carbohydrate present in the food. Pure glucose has a glycemic load of 100, same as it has a glycemic index of 100, because it's pure glucose glucose.
The higher the number, the more insulin is released, and it's a much more accurate prediction of defect on blood sugar. Example, watermelon has a glycemic load of 4, so not nearly as much of a glycemic load as some other things like bread.
So, the way to really help people out a lot, and you should try this for yourself, I think everyone's, you know, if the end's, you should just be trained in the use of a glucometer.
And it's a be a good little video of someone wants to make it, and videotape using your glucometer. And you want to check your blood sugar before breakfast lunch and dinner and before bed for three, four days, and just get a pattern, see what your pattern is. Now you always go before the meal, and it should be about 80 to 90.
You're using the metric system in other countries, it's 4.2 to 5, and ideals will vary from person to person. Pattern should be assessed, but basically, if you only did it once a day, like before lunch, it should be 90.
And if it's higher, then you might have a little insulin resistance, you know, you're not metabolizing properly or you're eating wrong. So, by lunch, your morning spike and blood sugar should have come back down to 90.
So, if you start off in the morning at 80 or 90, eat breakfast, so obviously you're going to go up, especially depending on the glycemic load of that meal, remember you want the glycemic index to be low, glycemic load to be low, you want slow absorption of sugar, that way you won't get the, because if you get the big spike, you're also going to get a big spike in insulin, and that's going to drive the sugar down, reload, and you're going to get hypoglycemic.
So basically, before lunch, it should all have sort of dissipated and it should be back down to about 90.
And if it's run and high, we need to do some things to control your carbohydrate metabolism, and there's ways we can do that, we'll talk about later.
Great here, how to balance glycemic levels. Do not skip meals, skipping meals disrupts blood sugar levels, slows metabolic rate and sets you up for binses and cravings, include fiber protein and fat at each meal to slow the passage of carbohydrates through the digestive system.
Fiber also slows the rate, which glucose is absorbed, so the higher fiber things help you control blood sugar. Eat the right mac and nutrient ratios for you, avoid high glycemic foods as these will raise blood sugar.
Me, for instance, you know, I just can't do the bread and stuff like that. If you're already eating greens, you're going to have trouble.
If you're, remember, most of the people we're talking about here, they're not feeling good. People come to us as health coaches, because they don't feel good.
Coming to us as if the ants, because they've been chasing their tail for a long time.
So you probably want to eliminate all greens for a while, unless you really know that genetically they can handle some whole green, and because the cereal star rice corn and white potatoes, white potatoes are very high glycemic index.
Real pure star tea type of things. Limit fruits to berries and other low glycemic options.
Like, you know, there's citrus fruits tend to be real high glycemic index. Avoid dried or tin fruits.
Dry fruit is like pure sugar and also usually contain some mold, by the way, mold is not good. Tin fruits, same things, you know, your canned fruits that are really high glycemic index.
Once blood sugar is under control, I just like potatoes, rice and a white or a variety of fruits can be added back in, avoid alcohol. Why alcohol is the perfect carbohydrate, and it sets you up for being a bad sugar metabolizer.
So let's continue with this balancing blood sugar here. Eliminate refined carbs. This is your cookies and things like that. They are low and fiber and they're for raised blood glucose levels too quickly.
Cool factors need a carbohydrate metabolism that are present in the germ and husk of grains are removed during the refining process. Not good. That's why we say, if you already didn't green, eat the whole green. That means the germ and the husk, or at least the germ is still in the flour or whatever it was made out of.
Now this is really critical. By the way, you'll see chromium highlighted there. Chromium is one of the best supplements you can take to help you control your blood sugar.
And 80% of chromium, which is essential in enhancing the active of insulin, is lost when refining wheat flour.
Amazing. Also, loss in refining process are b-vitamin zinc and magnesium also needed for carb metabolism. Crazyness. Now get a wide array of minerals through diet.
Broccoli green means raw cheese and grass fit beef or high in chromium. Raw cheese better than pasture ice cheese, right? So these things I and chromium will help you stabilize your blood sugar.
Again, I've had lots and lots of clients who remember we just said previously, like your your blood sugar should be 90 before lunch. Well, if it's run in 110, there's a problem. Now just giving them chromium usually you add venadium to it. Chromium venium supplement like, you know, morning and afternoon and even evening. You'll see that blood sugar come down. It's kind of crazy.
Now we want to do it through training them deep proper diet, but there you go. So a little trick for you.
Some effective supplements include magnesium vitamin D and C chromium, alpha-lipoca acid, coins, I'm cutin, but must be customized to the individual.
Craving sweets can be assigned to chromium deficiency. Craving chocolate is assigned to magnesium deficiency. I've heard that for 20 years.
You know, chocolate is very high in magnesium. Get adequate sleep and exercise. Obviously the whole dress thing and investigate hidden stressors.
All right. So this is basically a continuation of the last little lesson. The problems with sugar.
So obviously contributes to metabolic chaos. It's highly addictive and toxic. Can spike blood sugar levels within minutes.
And the overconsumption of sugar decreases the ability of insulin to perform its job of making cells take up glucose.
This can lead to insulin resistance and can lead to diabetes. Now the symptoms of too much sugar in insulin resistance look a lot like other problems like fatigue,
you have to miss headaches, anxiety and inability to concentrate. So a lot of people come to us with those kind of problems and they really suck.
And sometimes it's just that they're doing sugar. And these highly sugared energy drinks are really crap.
And I have to tell you I've never, ever had an energy drink ever, not one. And sugar in immunity. Sugar in habits, neutrophils, which are the main cells responsible for engulfing and destroying pathogenic microorganism.
So you've seen this on blood test, neutrophils, and inhibits them. So it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's done. You're, I mean, if you're sick, don't eat sugar. Don't eat sugar anyway, but there's a good one for you.
So according when study, 100 grams of sugar, and I would be a lot of sugar. I don't know how you could eat 100 grams, but that will inhibit the immune system 50% from up to five hours.
So I've seen on a lot of these energy drinks and different drinks. You know, I'm at the grocery store. I'm always picking up a bottle of something that looks cool and reading a label and then putting it back on the shelf.
And I've seen 30, 40 grams on one of these small bottles of some kind of drink. And a lot of times watch up for this one.
So you're looking at a bottle that looks like 12 ounces is something. And you read the label and says, number of servings per container. It'll go about two.
Well, that's nonsense. You know, you're going to drink the whole thing. But the reason they do that, because then they can say, oh, there's only 30 grams of sugar per serving.
And they're telling you that there's two servings in the 12 ounce can or bottle, which is nonsense. So you know, you pretty much, they know that no one's going to, you know, buy it if it says, you know, 60 grams of sugar.
But anyway, glucose knocks out vitamin C from cell receptor sites and having high blood glucose levels means less vitamin C enters the cells. So look how what we eat regulates metabolism.
Are you, you're kind of getting the point. I know now other problems with sugar. It's strongly implicated in dyspiosis of the gut flora and candida overgrowth. It's also implicated implicated obviously in tooth decay, PMS depression, ADHD cardiovascular disease, degeneration of bones and connective tissue and of course cancer.
Now, table sugar is half glucose, half fructose. Fructose needs to be converted by the liver to glucose. So it does, you know, metabolize a little bit slower than than the other part of sugar, the glucose part.
But when a large amount of fructose is consumed at once, at least one third of that converted to glucose is directly converted to fat, you know, triglycerides. Exist fructose can also interfere with leptin. That's the hormone that regulates appetite.
And so it can affect leptin receptor ship in the brain and these kind of things and you won't know that you're full. You won't know that your appetite has been met and you just keep eating.
It's crazy. Now sugar can be labeled as sugar, raw white or brown, glucose, sucrose, lactose, fructose, maltose, dextrose, coconut sugar, which is high in fructose, agave, very high in fructose, corn syrup, high fructose, corn syrup, golden syrup, dice saccharides, monoseccharides and concentrated fructose, which is very high in fructose.
So if you see any of those things on a label, it just means sugar. No, maybe even worse are artificial sweeteners. Many have ironically been found to increase weight gain, imagine that.
It has been hypothesized that they slow down metabolism. They also have been shown to increase appetite. Absolutely. There's as per team, which is just poison, saccharine and sucrose, more poison. And you can study up on this stuff. Just tell clients that it's bad. Don't use it ever.
Now artificial sweeteners continue to hear the sugar alcohols may not be as bad. No, I try to avoid them. If I see any of those things in the ingredients, I'm not going for it.
Even though they do have less of an effect on blood sugar levels. For some people, if you just got to have something sweet, it would be better than sugar and better than some of the other artificial sweeteners.
But still, I think they should be avoided and they're hard to digest.
You get people who eat enough of it and they'll have a sensitivity to these kind of things that get gasploding, diarrhea, cramping even.
If you have been diagnosed with SIBO, if you run later in one of our advanced courses, you can learn all about SIBO and you definitely don't want to do sugar alcohols. I tell clients to avoid them.
The least harm of full sweeteners will be raw honey, dates sugar, which is from dates and rapid dura, which I don't really know where you might get that, but it is in some foods.
You want to use all these things, so you don't impact glucose levels too much, but they're not bad sweeteners. I have put raw honey in my tea, although I don't need to. Most of the tea I drink now is herbal and I can tolerate it without that stuff.
People see it, one of my favorites is a little less harmful too. You get to organic kind if you can, and malt syrup, sogum syrup, these things, to have some minerals and maybe earn as bad.
Try not to use these things, but if you have to use sweeteners, use the least harmful ones. The last is, I was just at a conference and I saw a whole booth that was dedicated completely to monk fruit extract. They were given up all kinds of hype on it, but the truth is, it doesn't affect blood sugar levels like some of the other sweeteners, so not a bad choice.
That is my preferred sweetener, actually, I always keep some stevia around for guests to just have to have sugar around some.
But, bottom line, all sweeteners should be used with caution by those with blood glucose imbalances. If you're totally healthy and you totally have a good control of your blood sugar, then you could use some, maybe a little more often.
But some researchers believe there is the potential for any sweet foods coming into contact with the tongue to trigger an insulin response. The body's trick into thinking glucose is coming.
Now, that has happened to me many times over when I was more sensitive, I actually used to be what's called hyper-insulinemic.
The slice of amount of sugar used to trigger an enormous amount of insulin, I would over-reproduce insulin. Of course, my blood sugar would drop.
People were telling me I had hypoglycemia. I didn't have hypoglycemia as much as hyper-insulinemia.
It was the over-production insulin based on just a tiny amount of sweetener. The funny thing is, and I've had one client at least who was testing their blood sugar.
They would notice that a while after they ate artificial sweetener, that their blood sugar would drop. Why is that? Because it's trick and triggered the insulin response.
It's just something that the way the body works, if you get one of these sweet things, comes to contact with your body, it can trigger an insulin response. So that's why you should avoid sweetener.
You have to, and you get the ones that don't have any effect on blood sugar levels, or very little if any. Now, we're going to talk a little bit about refined carbohydrates, which are from the next worst thing to sugar.
The removal of the German husk from grains removes certain co-factors required for the simulation of the food in which they're contained. So the body has to draw on its own stores of those nutrients in order to assimilate that food.
And it's going to be to nutrient deficiencies or at least imbalances. And I want to remind you how important the micronutrient balances are. Your design perfectly, your genetically designed program for certain nutrient balances and combinations and ratios of all the micronutrients, all the minerals, all the vitamins, fight on nutrients, all the trace elements, all the sense of fatty acids and antioxidants and new name it.
So you're designed for a certain mixture. So if you're eating one food that's removing those co-factors or knocking down the levels of those co-factors, that's not a good thing.
And refined carbohydrates are rapidly broken down into glucose and spike blood sugar levels. So we're talking about things like bread and cookies.
I mean, even if they don't have a lot of sugar in them, like cookies obviously, very sweet bread, which you don't typically look at it as a really sweet cookie like things.
It really spikes your blood sugar levels. So to be avoided almost as much as sugar. And these things can stimulate an overgrowth of candida albicans or contribute to a friendly environment.
Remember, remember, Candida is very opportunistic. So eating refined carbs is creating a good environment for them to overgrow.
Now fiber is really, really important. You need fiber. It forms a structural part of plants. There's non-starch polysaccharides that might be called, which you know are multiple.
They're not the monosaccharides or the disaccharides, the multi-teens of, you know, sugars.
They may also be made up of dexterous, pecans, inulin, Lyon, beta-glucans, oligosaccharides, and waxes.
It cannot be broken down by the body. It's digestive enzymes. They're found in all plant foods, greens, vegetables, things like that. And let's look at it a little bit more closely soluble fiber.
The source of water becomes gelatinous. It's still hitting the passage of waste through the digestive tract. You've seen this gelatinous. If you've ever used a selium husk for instance, you've seen this gelatinous stuff. It could even sort of come out gelatinous, depending on how fast your digestive tract is.
Now, it provides food for friendly bacteria in the colon. It kind of a, you know, prebiotic, if you will. These bacteria benefit the body by preventing the colonization and proliferation of pathogens.
By competing for attachment sites and nutrients, thus preventing microbial imbalance or dyspiosis. Good thing. Also, they benefit the body by synthesizing B vitamins, as well as vitamin K. They can be then used by the liver to produce clotting proteins and other stuff.
And providing 5% of the body is energy needs by a synthesis of fatty acids. So soluble fiber is important. It binds to toxins, help and remove them along with the feces.
It binds to cholesterol containing the bile that's been secreted by the liver and bound cholesterol is in excreted with the feces and not reabsorbed into the blood. Now, this idea of things coming out through the bile from the liver and the gallbladder into the cell.
And how some of that can get recirculated back through the bile, back into the liver is a very important idea is called enterohopadic circulation.
You know, it just keeps, it just stays in circulation. A lot of toxins, certain types of toxins do that.
And so what we want is for some of those toxins and excess cholesterol here to be bound up, you know, bound to the soluble fiber and excreted to want to get reabsorbed.
So this concept of enterohopadic circulation is very, very important. And it can slow this fiber, can slow the absorption sugar in there for help regulate blood sugar levels.
Good sources include linseed, TSC's, legumes, mushrooms, apples, lots and lots and lots of different sources of soluble fiber.
Insoluble fiber does not absorb water and is less readily digested by bacteria in the cloned.
So for remains intact and provides bulk to feces. A good thing, if you like nice bowel movements, you know, if facilitates the past, as it saws waste through the large intestine, a good thing.
Sources include whole greens, vegetables, nuts and seeds. I think the vegetables being the primary thing you want to be, you're consuming in terms of insoluble fiber.
And there's other ways to get it to.
So let's do a little bit about fruits and vegetables. These are a good source of complex carbohydrates and fiber and beneficial micronutrients like we're talking about.
This is where for our, at the end, you're going to get most of your vitamins and minerals from anyway.
Now there's vitamins and minerals in other, you know, in protein, meat and things like that, but it's going to come from your vegetables.
And a little bit of fruits is fine too. For some people, like slow oxidizers and the sympathetic dominant, you know, more vegetables is better.
But anyway, source of complex carbs and fiber, it's got the micronutrients in it, antioxidants, vitamins, minerals, et cetera.
People with blood sugar problems, or people who oxidize fuel quickly, you know, your fast oxidizers, need to be wary of fruits and high-starts vegetables.
Because they're high in the glycemic index scale. And so they're high on the glycemic load.
Remember, it's more about the load of the plate full of food.
So things like beats, potatoes, yams, summer, winter squash, sweet potato and stuff.
Pretty high in the glycemic load, and they will add to the glycemic load of a plate of food.
And so you might want to leave a little bit of that on the plate if you're a fast oxidizer.
Now, the same people, you know, the fast oxidizers need to watch for low blood sugar reactions, hunger, feeling physically full, but still hungry and sweet cravings soon after eating.
That means you're not eating enough protein and fat with the meal. You're eating too much fruits and vegetables.
So we would have you guys experiment with reducing quantities of foods or eating them along with increased quantities of fats and protein.
So you probably aren't going to just eat, you know, you know, take this bag.
Occasionally, you can eat an apple, you know, something like that. These little glycemic things, the berries and stuff.
You could sit down and eat just a salad or something, but you're going to be much, much better off if you always put fat and protein on it. Like every time.
I haven't drank fruit juice in 15 years since I found out I was a fast oxidizer parasympathetic dominant. I don't drink orange juice apple to any of it. And because I know what it does to me. And it is essentially just sugar. Anyway.
You know, it says here, the same people may not do well in choose vegetables and I am okay with choose vegetables, but I do add the eggs. Like throwing eggs in there. You never know they're in there, but it does add the protein.
You know, that's good for some people. I saw Joe Mercola doing that once. It actually looked pretty good raw cream because raw cream is going to have protein. It's going to have fat. It's got a little bit of carbon it too, but you're going to do better on your juice vegetables if you add the protein.
And so, by the way, a lot of fast oxidizers and parasympathetics to very poorly on juice vegetables. They get the oxalates and things. Just make it feel terrible and you can actually get aches and pains from doing so.
Next thing here, non-starchy vegetables are very low on the glycemic index scale and provide the body with adequate fiber without the xx sugar. So what does that mean? Non-starchy vegetables. Good for everybody.
The most organic is best that goes without saying, although my comment about organic food, you've heard me say a few times. The reason you buy organic is to avoid herbicides and pesticides. It doesn't have that much more nutrition in it. Maybe a little bit if the farmer was composting the soil with compost, like, you know, decayed vegetation and things like that.
And most organic is good because you're avoiding just the herbicides pesticides and pesticides and things like that. And therefore, it's less stressful in the body. It's better for you.
Now, especially kind of a thing, you know, we all hear about, "Oh, get off dairy, get off grains, especially wheat," and these things, and you'll feel better. A lot of people do. And that's okay if you want to have someone do that. But right up there at the top of this might be nitchids.
If you're doing just a elimination diet, a rotation diet, the things you would get off of would be, again, the certain grains and dairy and corn, you know, soy and eggs and nitchids are right up there. Like potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant, peppers, peenums, Cape Gooseberry. I've actually used to love the Gooseberry.
Chinese landers, tomato, ground cherry, not an Illa, and treat tomato garden, Huckleberry, Chile and paprika. So these contain lectin, cipun and capsicum. These can be pretty things that people are very sensitive to. They may or not be tolerated and maybe healthy for some individuals, but inflammatory for others.
It's like I was telling you earlier, you know, I look at a plate of, you know, here's a steak and there's a salad, but the salad's got tomatoes on it. Well, for people who are sensitive to nitchids, they would leave those on the plate, either rest, leave what's not good for you. And just politely, like I say, leave it there. Put it in an abcan, put it in your pocket.
Now, in cases of autoimmune disease or degenerative problems involving the bones or joints, you definitely want to get off nitchids.
Or you run the food sensitivity test. But a great test is just to get off them and see if your joints feel better. It's amazing sometimes.
Now, grains, this is very controversial. My buddy Bill Wolkont, who's a metabolic typing authority, would say that there's plenty of people that tolerate them just find their whole cultures going back millennia.
They do great on grains. Grains actually could be and should be a very reasonable source of nutrition. There's lots of vitamins and minerals and oils and protein and everything, you know, pretty much.
Again, the fiber and things. But what we're finding is that they're not necessary for a healthy diet. You can eat other stuff and do very well without them.
If you have a sensitivity, don't worry. You can make up for it. And the one thing in particular from grains is the gluten. That's a protein in many grains.
In many grains, it's very difficult to digest. Some people actually have a genetic inability to break down the glide in, which is actually what's in gluten.
That's the fraction of gluten that is inflammatory and damaging to this mountain. That's the glide in. That's in wheat and there's, you know, some of the same stuff in barley and rye.
Oh, it's not so much. So gluten must be completely avoided in cases of see the act disease. Now gluten activates zonulin. Zonulin definitely is a loosening type of compound.
So zonulin loosens up tight junctures. Both in the gut and in the brain, believe it or not. So gluten activates zonulin.
Therefore contributes to intestinal permeability. Even if people aren't sensitive or allergic to it, that's what recent research shows. So do you want to eat gluten?
No, you want to go gluten free. If you're not well, go gluten free. If you're in perfect health, you might be able to get by in small amounts, but why take the chance?
I mean, even Starbucks now has a gluten-free bacon sandwich. It's amazing. But keep in mind it because something's labeled gluten-free doesn't mean it's good. It might be full of sugar and a bunch of other crap.
Anyway, both gluten sensitivity and see the act disease can present without any gut symptoms. Matter of fact, maybe 15% of people will see the ecology I symptoms. Seven out of eight have other symptoms.
And common non-gut symptoms include unexplained aches and pains, headaches, fatigue, brain fuchs, skin problems, all kinds of things. Greens also contain fightic acid. Talk about that in a bit. And refined green products should be avoided as we learned on the last slide of refined carbs a couple of slides ago.
So greens is basically very high in pesticides or best source to organically like everything is best avoid greens until a food sensitivity test is run in most cases.
Here's legumes, mostly beans, contain both proteins and carbohydrates. They may or may not be tolerated, maybe healthy for some individuals, but inflammatory for others. They contain a couple different types of complex sugars.
And those are pretty difficult to digest. That's why over history tribes and people have learned to soak their beans overnight. It starts breaking down those sugar. There are much easier to digest.
So always been said, it takes the farts out of them. And so again, we're going to talk about fightic acid in a minute. But soybeans are especially problematic. And you should only buy organic non-GMO or non-tenetically engineered legumes.
So here's some other stuff on carbohydrates, some resources. You can just look at your slides and check these out if you want to. And so that's going to be it for this section. And we'll be going on next to the proteins.
Okay, great job. Now let's look at proteins. Dietary sources for proteins is we know mostly animal sources, meatfish, shellfish, dairy, eggs, things like that. They contain the highest quality proteins.
So complete proteins those with the highest amount and best ratios of essential amino acids. And so they have to be broken down to basically sort of release those amino acids. But that's where you're going to get all your amino acids. Best choices past your fed pre-reens and organic, obviously. Now there are plant sources of dietary protein. The gumes nuts and seeds.
These contain lower levels of protein and most of not contain all the essential amino acids in one food. So they're kind of incomplete proteins.
Although there are lots of vegetarians and even vegans who swear by this stuff. I personally do not approve vegan one bit, not for a human being. And I think that the vegetarians should cheat. Now the role in the body obviously many, many things, but structural proteins form the building blocks for structures of the body.
Character in skin, collagen and elastin in connective tissue and muscle acting in myocin in muscle. These kind of things functional proteins, proteins make up enzymes, some hormones.
They regulate body functions really critical. Good quality dietary proteins fill you up and keep your set aside for satisfied for longer. Now what you're seeing here, and by the way, why am I going through all this stuff?
These things about protein and carbs and sugars and stuff. It's to give you ammunition so that you can coach up your clients. You should listen to this video. Obviously you're watching it probably right now and you're going along with the slides.
But you should get the download of the audio only. So you can just listen to my wonderful voice going over all this stuff over and over and over again and kind of burn it in.
Because when you're doing your consults with your client, these subjects will come up and you need to be able to refer back and they'll go. But I prefer, you know, just beans and nuts and seeds.
And you can tell them look, those are great, but they don't really have all the essential amino acids. You know, it's basically incomplete protein. So we want you to eat the complete proteins. You can do whatever you want.
But eating past your fed free range organic meats are going to provide more complete sources for you. So that's what you give them the why and they can make better decisions.
So it's always about giving them the why and that's why I'm going through all this stuff the way I'm and again you should listen over and over and over again.
A protein digestion really critical in the stomach, 8 C L, the natures proteins means it just starts to break them down. It converts the inactive enzyme.
If it's synrogen to its acts of active form pepsin, I've given lectures on this on digestion and things. So you have an enzyme being produced in the in the stomach pepsinogen and hydrochloric acid converts it to pepsin.
So that's what happens in the small intestine. These short chains, short chain polypeptides get broken down into even shorter chains and then they can get absorbed. And it's largely the pain creatic enzymes.
What if symphony the body has man? I mean, you know, you're looking at food, you're smelling food, you're turning on the juices, you chew your food. It's like good teeth are important. It's why hydration's really important. You need to have lots of saliva and you mix it with the food. It starts breaking it down.
It goes into the small intestine, you're continuing to break it down even more with pain creatic enzymes. You're turning on the juices, you chew your food. It's like good teeth are important. It's why hydration's really important. You need to have lots of saliva and you mix it with the food. It starts breaking it down. It goes into the small intestine into the stomach.
It starts breaking it up. It helps to form pepsin, which breaks up the proteins even better. And then once it gets in the small intestine, you're continuing to break it down even more with pain creatic enzymes. Of course, you'll learn this in a minute, but that's where also bile starts breaking down the fats.
We already learned that carbohydrates are getting broken down by the bar's border enzymes and it's really just quite amazing. So these short, shorter chain polypeptides get broken down into the single amino acids.
And you know what those are. These are the things that turn into neurotransmitters and all kinds of other wonderful things we need for proper metabolism in balance in robotics.
So low-8CL or lack of digestive enzymes can impair protein digestion and carb, in fact, and things, but proteins are really critical. Long-term poor protein digestion can lead to hormone abounds as poor glycemic, water abounds as an eventually male absorption of all nutrients.
Now, we have a test that the urine test, the bile health 101, which measures indican, which is an effective screening tool for assessment of protein digestion.
You can tell if you're not breaking down protein with the urine test. It's a very cool thing. You'll learn about that in other lessons or another part of the course. If you haven't already learned about it, and I think you have.
So let's talk a little bit about protein absorption and metabolism. In the small intestine, these amino acids pass into the caplars within the bile and they go over to the liver of course.
amino acids that can be used immediately by the liver have their amine group removed. So in the liver, there's this phase 1 phase 2 phase 1 breaks things apart and phase 2 usually attaches something to a molecule or an element.
So in phase 1, you're pulling it apart. So you have the amine group removed. This is sort of the biochemistry of it. And then the useless part of it can be excreted through the urine.
And it's going to, the urine also filters the blood. So it's a good thing. Now the remaining portion of the amino acids used to form keto acids like acetylkoate, which can then be used for energy production. So that's, you know, we're not going to get into that deep like the crebsycle and how energy is produced.
But you can see that you need these proteins to form keto acids which are used in the crebsycle for energy production within cells. Very, very critical thing.
The amino acids delivered does not require for me to use or return to the blood where they're taken up by cells to form proteins for the body.
Functional proteins like we said enzymes are among antibodies, structural proteins cause in the last and caretone. You know, all the muscles and tissues and hormones and things. Proteins cool.
And metabolism is cool. So the body to make a particular protein, all the amino acids for that protein must be present in the cell at the same time.
So if any are missing, the protein cannot be made. And the amino acids are instead either oxidized for energy or converted to carbohydrates and fats.
That sucks. The cell is chasing forces. Importance of eating complete protein. You vegans you.
Excess amino acids are converted to fat and stored in adipose tissue.
And if like glucose is low and there are no glycogen stores, the liver can synthesize glucose from amino acids. We mentioned this early.
So if you have low blood sugar and your liver doesn't have any glycogen stores, that's the stored form of glucose.
Then the liver will do what we told you in gluconeogenesis. It'll actually synthesize glucose from amino acids.
Now what does that mean? Your body will eat itself up because you know, the same thing happens in muscle. You'll actually break down muscle and proteins in your body to just take raise blood sugar.
So let's look at meat and poultry. Those are your good sources of complete proteins.
Grass fed meat contains more the healthy omega-3 fats than green fed meat.
Always eat grass fed beef. All meat and poultry should ideally be organic, pasture fed, free range, and free from hormones and antibiotics.
Absolutely. Now in some countries, that's not even a question. Like of course, they're not allowed to use hormones and antibiotics in domestic animals that are being eaten by people.
And of course here in the United States, there's a lot of use of those things. So be careful about what you're eating.
Now regard avoid processed meats. And this is too bad because I love lunch. I used to just love lunch meats, you know.
And I got it done to where I don't eat her. The anyway I do eat some bacon, things like that. But you've got to watch the editors and preserves to get the least amount of that bad stuff is possible.
Now fish, awesome fish. Fish used to be called brain food. Fish are a good source of complete protein.
Wild cut fish are an excellent source of omega-3 fatty acids. Remember I've told you like, "A on the plate, your protein is going to have the fat with it."
That's pretty much what we want. You can't eat farm-reast fish, but they're low in omega-3 because they're not eating the aquatic plant.
They're being fed fish food. They just don't have the same diet as wild fish. They have a higher levels of PCBs which are bad environmental toxins.
Like I just said, they're fed with corn or soy pellets. Other pesticide residues in that are routinely dosed with antibiotics and are fed with synthetic dyes to make their flesh pink.
You see this farm-reast pink salmon and things like that. Always opt for wild cut fish if it's just half too.
So fish and mercury. Risk and mercury takes us to your greatest for young children pregnant and breastfeeding women who might be pregnant and individuals with heart disease.
Even small amounts can harm a developing fetus and permanently reduce the child's intellectual abilities.
You might not want to eat much fish if you're pregnant.
Mercury can also inhibit these drops in a vitamin B12 and other minerals and elements that are very important.
The environmental working group recommends one or two servings per week a seafood, which is bad for me because I love it so much.
But that's about what I eat one or two servings per week. It's very high in omega 3s as we said low in mercury.
Make sure that your seafood is high in omega 3s and low in mercury.
So environmental working group, you can just Google that. It's a great, great organization and website that will tell you about fish which wants to eat, which wants not to eat and these kind of things.
The best bits are that I think smaller things that haven't been around long enough to absorb a lot of stuff.
If purchasing can salmon check for the word word wild, make sure it says wild. If purchasing can tuna, only chooses the state on the can that is low mercury.
Impact in olive oil or water, not other oils.
Makes sense to me.
Now we're going to go to dairy. So dairy is very interesting. It does have a lot of protein and also has some fat and some carbs.
It should be a good food. But it may or may not be tolerated, maybe healthy for some individuals and inflammatory for others.
Remember, it's got three ways of not being good for you and three ways of being good for you. It's got protein, fat and carbs.
The case scene is the protein. It's actually pretty difficult to digest and the sugar in it in dairy requires the intestinal enzyme lactase.
If you don't have enough lactase, you will not be able to digest lactose, which is a milk sugar. That's more or less the carbs that's in dairy.
Some individuals possess a gene that allows continued production of lactase after weaning. So they'd be better at digesting milk.
But even then, if any kind of gut dysfunction damage to the lining of the small intestine, the ability to produce lactase is impaired.
Remember, lactase is one of those enzymes produced in the breast border. So, you know, people with weak gut tend to be not going to do well on dairy. That's why we get this body of body off dairy.
For a while, you know, until they're all fixed. If dairy is tolerated, raw is best, as it contains the health-giving properties and all the enzymes that are supposed to be in it to help it sort of digest itself, if you will.
For just only organic and derived from pasture fed cows. And, of course, it's trying to find it as pretty difficult these days.
Although, I do use only raw butter and cultured butter in that kind of thing. Everyone should avoid pastries, so much in this milk and processed teas. I believe it.
Now, a little bit more about dairy. Milk proteins commonly cross your ass with gluten. Oh my goodness. Well, you just washed down that white bread sandwich was milk.
So, if something were asked to dig gluten, they're more likely to have a sensitivity to dairy. In cases of leaky gut, it's more likely that the immune system will respond to potentially allergic components in dairy.
When the gut is healed, they may be of the tolerate dairy. So, you know, it's just what we've been saying. Avoid dairy in cases of the small intestinal bacterial overgrowth or seabull.
And the reason for that is because bacteria in the small intestine aggressively ferment lactose, which remember that lactose is the sugar that's in dairy, causing gas bloating and other intestinal symptoms.
It's best everyone avoids all dairy until the food sensitivity tests is run. And even then, you could still avoid it. So, another one of my favorites, proteins is eggs.
It's a good source of complete protein and omega-3 fatty acids, gluten, cinethane, coline, selenium, phosphorus, vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin B vitamins and things like that.
May or may not be tolerated, it may be healthy for some individuals, but inflammatory for others. That's why it's, and it isn't, I'd say, the top five or six things to be avoided in people who are really sensitive that you haven't run a food sensitivity test on yet.
Certain enzymes and egg whites can be problematic for many people.
Two is organic eggs from pasture-free, range, poultry, which contain more of the healthy omega-3 fats. I actually, in my grocery store, get the extra omega-3 eggs.
So, the chickens have been fed a healthier diet that helps them produce eggs that are higher in omega-3. So, I get the extra omega-3 eggs.
In the case of autoimmune disease, or that you get probably best avoid eggs again until you can run a test. Everyone's different. I love eggs, but I need to use it also get some richer protein as well.
Finishing up here in the protein section, we mentioned soybeans specifically because they do tend to be high in protein and might be a pretty good food for some people.
But so, it contains high levels of phytoestrogens, which are endocrine disruptors. Basically plant estrogens is what that means.
They contain extremely high levels of phytoic acid and gut-goatrogens, which means they help produce goaters. That'll be discussed later in this module.
But they also contain enzyme inhibitors that interfere with protein and simulation. So, even though they're high in protein, they have enzyme inhibitors that interfere with the digestion of that protein.
It's best to eat and fermented because then you've already done some of the breakdown and more or less digestion of it.
So, miso, nato, tempay, pretty good. I actually eat some miso. I find it's okay. Miso soup and that kind of stuff.
However, this does not remove the phytoestrogens, so not too much. Soy sauce should be naturally fermented in, of course.
How do you process soy? Soy milk soy derivatives? These things should be avoided. I'm not into the soy protein shakes and stuff like that.
Look at the protein isolate that you're, it was made from soy. You probably don't want to do that. A lot of that again because of the phytoestrogens.
So, here's some additional reading on proteins and now you know more than your clients need to know. You've been loaded up now with a lot of information on proteins.
So, come back in just a bit and take a quick break. We'll come back and we'll talk about fats.
