# 20+2022+and+2025+M15+L1-3+1PP
*Converted from: 20+2022+and+2025+M15+L1-3+1PP.pdf*

---

## Page 1

Module 15 10/1/2022
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 15: Onboarding and Managing Your Clients - They Must "Get it" Too!
Lesson 1: How to Onboard and Document a New Client
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
1
1

## Page 2

Module 15 10/1/2022
Objectives
This lesson covers:
Onboarding New Clients (With New Paradigm)
Creating the right expectations
Closing the deal
Emailing intake forms
Shipping kits
Starting on ?
You have learned the 5-lab intake method plus MT, you have learned much about each of the 5
habits of DRESS for Health Success® program, including how to recommend supplements and how
to put the 90-Day protocol sheet together.
Now its time to start practicing FDN!
2
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
2
2

## Page 3

Module 15 10/1/2022
Successful Outcomes…
…are dependent on individual limitations, some
of which may be hidden in complexities in the
mind and emotions of the individual you are
working with. We have little or no control over
people or outcomes, but we can control who
we work with…
Successful outcomes are the result of careful
consideration of which clients to work with and
creating realistic and reasonable expectations
3
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
3
3

## Page 4

Module 15 10/1/2022
FDN Onboarding and Intake
Healing opportunities are identified by taking careful histories and correlating them
with results from well-chosen labs. Here’s how you work, each client completes the
following tests/forms:
Metabolic Chaos® Scorecard (MCS)
FDN Stress and Hormones Panel
Lifestyle and Medical History Form (LMHF)
Fluids iQ Metabolic Wellness Panel
Terms of Service Agreement
Fluids iQ Mucosal Barrier Assessment
DSL GI MAP
Complete a Case Notes Form on every
Oxford MRT Food Sensitivity Assay
client. If it isn’t written down, it didn’t
Advanced Online Metabolic Typing® Test happen!
(www.Mtdiet.com)
“Test – Don’t Guess” ~ Reed Davis
4
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
4
4

## Page 5

Module 15 10/1/2022
FDN Intake - Best Practices
“Resolving Metabolic Chaos® takes a knowledgeable
practitioner and a willing (and able) participant” ~ Reed
Onboarding Interview
Forming initial impression
Deciding to accept
Closing the deal
Agreement
Intake Forms
“Right expectations are the basis of a successful outcome” ~ Reed
5
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
5
5

## Page 6

Module 15 10/1/2022
Interview – Points to Cover During the Call
Set goal for the call
Thanks for giving me a call or attending my workshop, etc.
The goal for today is to see if I can help you with your health concerns
If I can ask you a few questions, then we can decide later if working with me is something you choose to do
Initial Impression
8 main questions to ask (next slide)
I think I can help you (or Not)
Here is how I work
If its ok, I’ll tell you how I charge
My fees
Lab fees (supplements)
How to pay each (PayPal, credit card over the phone, etc.)
Trial Close
Handle any objections or questions and ask for a decision
Collect payment
Let them know the next steps
Lab kit logistics (easy to do) -Drop-shipped directly to them, which kits to expect and when
Explain basics of sample collection (saliva, urine, stool, etc.) for initial kits
Additional considerations (day 19-21 for cycling females)
Email to expect from you
Terms of agreement, Intake forms, More info about the testing (guidelines)
6
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
6
6

## Page 7

Module 15 10/1/2022
Interview – Forming Initial Impression
Qualifying a prospective client - 8 main questions to ask before accepting
1. What's your main health complaint?
2. How often does it bother you?
3. How long has it been going on for?
4. What have you tried so far that has not worked?
5. How does this affect your life or what does it prevent you from doing?
6. Who or what (fear, money, time) may stop you from completing a health
rebuilding program (who will support you)?
7. What would you (reasonably) expect to achieve while working with me?
8. On a scale of 1 – 10 how important is it to solve this?
7
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
7
7

## Page 8

Module 15 10/1/2022
Deciding to Accept New Client
Only accept clients who are ready, willing and able
1. They have a commitment level of 9 - 10
2. They are willing to pay you up front
3. They want to start right away
If not accepting them
1. Refer them out (to another practitioner, medical oversight, etc.)
2. Get them into a group
3. Come back when you’re ready (have the required support, funds,
commitment level)
8
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
8
8

## Page 9

Module 15 10/1/2022
Acceptance/Onboarding Client
You have decided to accept client into your practice
1. Get into agreement or “reality” about the program
2. Get payment “I only accept clients who are willing to start right away”
3. Distribute initial test kits
4. Email client using Initial Contact Email Template (Initial Contact Docs)
a) MC Scorecard
b) Lifestyle and Medical History Form
c) Terms of Service Agreement
Once you receive payment, only then do you really have a new client
Note: See “You’re Hired Checklist” in this Module
9
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
9
9

## Page 10

Module 15 10/1/2022
See M15 L1 Video 2
Reed spends 30 minutes doing an “onboarding session”
This is an excellent review of Onboarding/Discovery questions 1-8
Should include a “call to action” or “close”
10
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
10
10

## Page 11

Module 15 10/1/2022
Functional Diagnostic Nutrition®
The FDN Certification Course
Module 15: Onboarding and Managing Your Clients - They Must "Get it" Too!
Lesson 2: You’re Hired! Using Case Notes to Manage Client
Presented by Reed Davis, Founder of FDN
11
11

## Page 12

Module 15 10/1/2022
Interview – Forming Initial Impression
Qualifying a prospective client - 8 main questions to ask before accepting
1. What's your main health complaint?
2. How often does it bother you?
3. How long has it been going on for?
4. What have you tried so far that has not worked?
5. How does this affect your life or what does it prevent you from doing?
6. Who or what (fear, money, time) may stop you from completing a health
rebuilding program (who will support you)?
7. What would you (reasonably) expect to achieve while working with me?
8. On a scale of 1 – 10 how important is it to solve this?
Make Your Call to Action!
12
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
12
12

## Page 13

Module 15 10/1/2022
Call to Action (CTA)
Thank you, Ms. Smith, for answering all my questions, and I have good news for you.
Number one, I’m pretty sure I can help you. FDN was designed with you in mind. My fellow FDN Practitioners
and I help people like you every day to get back in control of their health starting with the functional lab work and
all-natural, drug-free protocols.
Number two, I’ve decided to accept you into my practice if we can agree on my terms. Would you like to hear
what those are? Explain: (You must do all 5 labs, work with me for 90 days)
Would you like to hear how I charge? Explain: “There are two fees, my professional fees plus the lab fees. I
charge ($5000) for a 90-day program and the lab fees are about $1000. (Don’t be iffy, don’t give too big of a
range) Get credit card for your fees!
Join AFDNP for more training on packaging and Pricing
13
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
13
13

## Page 14

Module 15 10/1/2022
You’re Hired!
FDN Document Hub – (See “You’re Hired Checklist”) and
Initial Contact Docs
FDN Initial Contact Email Template (see Document Hub)
1. Using Email Template
a) Send out intake forms* once payment is received
a) Metabolic Chaos® Scorecard
b) Lifestyle and Medical History Form
c) Terms of Service Agreement – (get back before ordering kits)
2. You complete Case Notes Form on each client – (See Mod 15 L2 Video 1)
3. Send out lab test kits – see You’re Hired Checklist
*Note: All forms including Terms of Service Agreement must be returned
before client gets first session with you (and all labs completed)
14
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
14
14

## Page 15

Module 15 10/1/2022
Quick Review
“Clients” must:
1. Have an unwanted health problem
2. Want to get rid of it –NOW
100% of clients (who follow the program for a minimum of 90 days) make improvements.
Each visit with client includes (or is in fact) an “Accountability Session” The number depends on you.
At 90 Days we re-assess where we are.(Starts with the first lab review). Usual forks in the road include:
1. Re-onboard –continue coaching program for another 90 days –possible retesting or deeper tasting
2. Release -Continue the program on their own because of the amount of education they have received, provide final course-
corrections, etc. Ask for referrals!
3. Refer out -or back to their physician (if there are apparent/persistent medical needs) and continue their DRESS FHS program
Bottom line is FDN works! Why we have hundreds of dedicated
FDN Practitioners serving thousands of clients all over the world
15
© copyright FDN Inc 2008-2022
15
15

## Page 16

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Overview Of MDP Services
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 17

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
What is the FDN Medical Director Program?
 The Medical Director Program (MDP) is a full-service lab-testing and clinical
support program created to support unlicensed FDN Graduates in practicing FDN
(those who don’t have a licensed practitioner to work with).
 FDNs need access to well-chosen and vetted lab tests to successfully design and
monitor effective D.R.E.S.S for Health Success® programs for clients.
 FDN Practitioners use the MDP to order lab tests under the FDN Medical Director.
 FDN Practitioners can use their FDN designation to open direct accounts with
several labs and third-party distribution companies.
 However, there are specific tests and specific labs that won’t work directly with an
unlicensed practitioner. In these cases, FDNs can use the MDP to order these tests.
2
2
2

## Page 18

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
What is the FDN Medical Director Program Cont’d
Ordering Services Facilitating Grad Direct Accounts Clinical Support Services
FDN has a credible relationship The MDP also provides
The MDP facilitates
with lab companies and third- clinical advisor sessions to
ordering lab tests for
party companies such as support FDN grads post
FDN trainees & grads.
Evexia, making it easy for FDN graduation.
grads to open their own
practitioner accounts with
these organizations.
3
3
3

## Page 19

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
1. First:Get a signed agreement with your client.
The Three Steps of:
The Lab Ordering Process 2. Second Step:Order lab kits.
3. Third step: Retrieve and analyze the test
results.
4
4
4

## Page 20

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
• The FDN Practitioner and the client establish a “fee-for-
services” contract, otherwise known as the “Terms of
Service Agreement”. This contract will describe what
services will be rendered and how payment will be
collected.
How the MDP Works • FDN Practitioner's “services” include expediting the
shipment of the lab test kits directly to the client from the
lab on behalf of the client. An FDN Practitioner cannot
“order” labs for a client the way a doctor “orders” labs
for diagnostic purposes. Rather, our clients are “self-
Step One: Terms of Service
testing” through a direct-to-consumer lab program. This
Agreement is legal and ethical.
•
• The Terms of Service Agreement further establishes that
the FDN Practitioner will review the lab tests results with
no intention to “diagnose” or treat any specific disease
or medical condition. Rather, the lab reports are
provided to the client for educational purposes only.
5
5
5

## Page 21

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
• After the "Terms of Service Agreement" has been
signed, you will order lab tests on behalf of your
client. There are three ways to order lab tests for
your client, depending on the test you want to
use.
How the MDP Works
 Ordering methods include:
Cont'd
• MDP: You can order testsby using FDN's
Medical Director Program.
• Evexia:Evexiais a third-party lab distributor
Step Two: Get Kits to
that has a partnership with FDN. You can open
Your Clients a practitioner account with Evexiaunder
theFDN umbrella.
• Direct fromLab: FDN has developed
relationships with several labs, where you can
open your own direct practitioneraccount
using yourFDNP credentials.
•
6
6
6

## Page 22

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
• Per the Terms of Service Agreement, the FDN Practitioner receives
completed lab test reports on behalf of their client
• Labs Ordered Through MDP: results will be emailed to you as soon as
MDP receives them. Please do not contact labs with which you do
not have a direct account.When you order through the MDP, the
MDP is the liaison between you and the lab. All communication with
the lab must go through the MDP, not the FDNP. Allow 3 weeks for
How the MDP Works results to be processed from the time the lab receives the sample.
Cont'd
• TheFDNP can also get results back directly from Evexiaor thelab.
Step Three: Results • Here are Examples of lab companies that you can orderfrom
directly:
FLUIDS iQ
Blood Chemistry through DHA Labs
MRT through Oxford Biomedical
• Here are Examples of lab companies that you must order from
the MDP:
DSL (depending on location), Cyrex, ARL,Vibrant Wellness (depending on
location). Each test ordered through the Medical Director Program includes a
Clinical Advisor session and interpretation guidance from an FDN Clinical
Advisor.
7
7
7

## Page 23

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
Who Pays for the Lab Fees and
MDP Fees ?
Option to pay on behalf of your client: As the FDN
Practitioner, you can pay for your client's tests
through your lab account or Evexia. You can collect
the money for the kits as part of your fees, then
order and pay for the lab kits yourself.
Option to have your client pay: If you wish to have
your client pay for their own tests, follow the
instructions from each lab. Each lab has a different
method of payment, whether it is via a payment link
sent to the client or a physical requisition form. It is
the responsibility of the FDNP to familiarize
themselves with each lab’s processes.
The MDP Fee: There is an MDP fee when you order
from the MDP. The FDN Practitioner will always pay
for the MDP fee.
8
8
8

## Page 24

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
Who Can Use the MDP?
•Traineeswill run the basic labs taught in the FDN
course on themselves.
•Active FDN graduates who are in good standing can
use the MDP.
Use of the Medical Director Program is not an
automatic right or entitlement. Use and access to
the Medical Director Program is a privilege earned
and maintained by successfully completing the FDN
Certification Course, strict adherence to using the
Terms of Service agreement with all clients,
maintaining high ethical standards by staying
within our scope of practice.
9
9
9

## Page 25

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
How to Order the 5 FDN Foundational Labs
 Fluids iQ: FDN Practitioner will open an account with Fluids iQ and order the SHP,
MWP, and MBA directly from the lab.
 DSL GI MAP: FDN Practitioner will open an account with Evexia and order the GI MAP
from Evexia. There are exceptions to this that we will be going over in a later lesson.
 Oxford Biomedical Mediator Release Test (MRT): FDN Practitioner will open an
account with Oxford and order directly from the lab.
In a later lesson, you will learn how to open an account with these companies, and
how to order these tests.
10
10
10

## Page 26

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
Clinical Support
• The MDP provides clinical support through
our seasoned Clinical Advisors on staff
• When you order a test kit from the MDP
and pay the MDP fee, you automatically
receive a Clinical Advisor Session.
• If you order tests outside the MDP, such as
from Evexia or directly from the lab, you
can purchase a Clinical Advisor Session
separately
• Clinical Advisor Sessions are HIGHLY
recommended whether you are a new
FDN or a well seasoned FDN. Clinical
Advisor Sessions help you see and think
outside of the box when practicing FDN
11
11
11

## Page 27

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
Summary of the MDP Overview
• The MDP is FDN's in-house lab condult and clinical support department
• With your FDN certification, you will be able to order tests from the MDP, Evexia and directly
from certain labs
• The "Terms of Service Agreement" MUST be signed prior to ordering labs for your
client through the MDP
• Using the MDP is a privilege that must be earned and maintained, not an automatic right.
• From start to finish, you are working on behalf of your client for educational purposes. You
are not diagnosing or treating a specific illness.
12
12
12

## Page 28

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 1 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
13
13

## Page 29

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
How to Order Test Kits from the MDP
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 30

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
Ordering from the MDP: What do MDP Fees Cover?
There is a service fee when you order from the MDP.The fee isstated on theMDPmenu, and depending on thetest you order, the fee may differ. The
fee covers:
 Our Medical Director’s signing fee. We pay for the privilege of using someone else’s license to order test kits for our clients.
 Processing orders, shipping and process reports
 Research and Development
 30 minute consult with a FDN Clinical Advisor
 Or 60minute consult withaFDN ClinicalAdvisor
 The MDP fee is $75 per test, unless otherwise noted on the MDP menu. If you become part of our Alumni, you get to enjoy a 20%discount on MDP
fees
 General Administration
Are there any additional fees?
 Some labs will not drop ship test kits. In these cases, FDN stocks the test kits and ships them directly to you or your client. FDN charges the
shipping cost to the FDN Practitioner. Costs vary depending on the test kit size and weight.
MDP Fees are NOT refundable, they are not transferable and cannot be saved for another client for later use!
You can reach out to orders@afdnp.comwith any shipping related questions.
2
2
2

## Page 31

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
What is the FDN Medical Director Program Cont’d
After the terms of service agreement has been signed, you can now order from the MDP.
To order from the MDP, sign into www.FDNconnect.com. Access the MDP menu under the Medical Director Program tab.
Orders are placed through the Medical Director Program Order Form:
https://www.fdnconnect.com/medical-director-program-order-form/
3
3
3

## Page 32

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and Order Tests!
• We’ll navigate the MDP menu
• Find and fill the MDP order form
• Complete an order
• Review a confirmation email
4
4
4

## Page 33

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
You Have Requested A Test Kit, Now What?
Once the kit(s) are ordered and payment received (MDP fee plus shipping if applicable) the kits will be shipped
within 1-2 business days.
You, the FDN Practitioner, receives an email confirmation from us that includes:
•An info sheet about the test that you ordered
•Any special instructions
•Turnaround time information
•Test requisition form (not all forms are included with the kit)
**Reading the confirmation emails are VERY important, they contain important information!!!**
Your client will receive the test kit via mail.
Your client will fill out the requisition form with their sample and mail back to lab.
5
5
5

## Page 34

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
A requisition form contains or will contain the following
information:
•Client/Patient information (full name, address, phone
number, and date of birth)
•Requesting Physician’s information will be prefilled.Do
notchange.
•The test being requested.Do not change.
The Requisition Form •Payment information on how the test will be paid (always
cash or patient pay).Fill out credit card section if necessary.
•Some forms also require information on when the samples
were collected and how much specimen was
Explained
collected. Instruct your clients to fill this part out accordingly.
What not to do!!
•Do not put your name down as the clinician or physician
•Do not add diagnosis codes –this is for licensed physicians
only; we do not use insurance!!
Please make sure that you instructing your client to fill out these
forms completely!!
6
6
6

## Page 35

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
How Delays Happen
Delay in getting results back can happen for the following
reasons:
•Your client fills in your name as the physician on the
requisition form
•Your client includes insurance information when insurance is
not an option
•Your clientuses a different name
•Your client doesn’t include payment
•The samples were collected incorrectly
•The samples were not packaged correctly
•The samples were returned during the wrong time frame
Bonus Tip –Teach your client to keep all of their tracking
information!!! This helps us find lost results!!!
7
7
7

## Page 36

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
What Happens Next?
Once the results are in you will receive an email from the MDP admin
with instructions on how to book your 30-minute clinical advisor
session.
Book your 30-minute session with a clinical advisor, email your results 2
days before the session and include the case notes form which will be
attached to your results email!
Be prepared for your session to make the most your 30 minutes with
your clinical advisor. A sk Questions!
8
8
8

## Page 37

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
Email: orders@afdnp.com
Contact The MDP
Phone: 858 649 1125
9
9
9

## Page 38

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 2 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
10
10

## Page 39

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Evexia
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 40

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
What Is Evexia?
EvexiaDiagnostics is a lab ordering platform that allows FDN practitioners to
order multiple, FDN approved tests in one place.
EvexiaServices clients in the USA, Canada, and Puerto Rico. (Evexiadoes not
service the states of NY, NJ, RI). FDNPs must have a US or Canadian address
to open an Evexiaaccount.
With Evexia, you will get practitioner pricing, be able to pay on behalf of your
clients, track orders, and easily access results.
FDN Practitioners get special perks when signing up with Evexiaunder the
FDN umbrella.
2
2
2

## Page 41

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account
To register for your account, log into
www.FDNconnect.comand select “Evexia
Diagnostics” in Medical Director Program tab.
3
3
3

## Page 42

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account Cont’d
1. On the next page, click on the button that
says “Open Your EvexiaAccount-Use Code
AFDNP”
2. Then, click on “Register Now”
4
4
4

## Page 43

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
Important notes on registering as a practitioner:
• Use your own name unless you have an established
business name
• Select the “Clinician NOT licensed to order labs in the USA”
option
• Ensure the AFDNP code is entered
How To Set Up A • You do not need to enter an NPI number
• You will be contacted by Evexiavia email and phone once
Practitioner Account your account is active.
• Be sure to have an onboarding call with Evexiato go over
all the logistics of their platform
Cont’d
5
5
5

## Page 44

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
Things To Know About Your FDN Evexia Account
FDN Practitioners get pre-populated, FDN selected blood panels. You can find these
panels under “my custom panels”.
Since you have your own Evexiaaccount, you can contact Evexiadirectly for any
inquiry you may have.
Your client’s results will be uploaded to your Evexiaaccount for easy access
FDN Practitioners have access to White Label marketing from Evexia. Just contact their
team for more information.
6
6
6

## Page 45

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and Order Tests!
• We’ll go in and order from Evexia
7
7
7

## Page 46

Module -15 -Lesson 3 -Video 3 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
8
8

## Page 47

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
FLUIDS iQ
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 48

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account
Fluids iQ provides the following tests in the
US and Canada:
MBA: Mucosal Barrier Assessment (i.e.
Intestinal Permeability &
Inflammation)
MWP: Metabolic Wellness Profile
SHP: Stress Hormone Profile
Once you graduate you will be eligible to
open your own Fluids iQ account. To register
for your account, log into
www.FDNconnect.com and select
the “Medical Director Program Menu”.
2
2
2

## Page 49

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account Cont’d
Under the screening categories, click
on the box that says "FDN
Foundational Labs“, then click on the
"more info" button on the "Fluids IQ"
thumbnail that appears.
3
3
3

## Page 50

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner
Account Cont’d
Click on the link that is embedded after the
statement "Graduates can order directly
from Fluids IQ- Open your account here".
4
4
4

## Page 51

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
Fill out the form as directed. You will have to input a credit card as
you pre-pay for the test as the practitioner. You will build this cost
into the price of your package if you wish to pay on behalf of your
client.
How To Set Up A
Practitioner Account
Cont’d
5
5
5

## Page 52

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account Cont’d
Log into your account
6
6
6

## Page 53

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and Order Tests!
• We’ll go in and order from FLUIDS iQ
• We will pre-populate your cart for
convenience
7
7
7

## Page 54

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
How To Obtain Results In The Fluids iQ Portal
• Fluids IQ will drop ship the lab to your client. Be
sure to instruct your clients accordingly on
how to collect and ship the samples.
• You will receive an email notification from
Fluids iQwhen results are ready and uploaded
to your portal.
• Log into your Fluids iQaccount, and from the
dashboard press “view results”. Enter your
client’s date of birth and the results will
appear.
8
8
8

## Page 55

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 4 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
9
9

## Page 56

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Oxford Biomedical
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 57

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account
Oxford Biomedical provides the Mediator
Release Test (MRT) in the US only. Once
you graduate, you will be eligible to open
your own oxford account and order the
MRT directly from the lab.
You must have a North American address
to open an account with Oxford.
To register for your account, log into
www.FDNconnect.com and select
the “Medical Director Program Menu”.
2
2
2

## Page 58

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner Account Cont’d
On the MDP menu, click on "FDN foundational
labs." Oxford Biomedical Technology will be on
the bottom right. Click on the blue button that
says, "more info".
3
3
3

## Page 59

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
How To Set Up A Practitioner
Account Cont’d
The button will take you to the MRT test
page. Embedded in the “screening details”
is the Oxford account registration link.
4
4
4

## Page 60

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
Important notes on registering as a practitioner:
• Use your own name unless you have an established
business name
• Say “yes” to having legal authority.
How To Set Up A • Choose FDNP as a credential.
• You do not need to enter an NPI number
Practitioner Account
• You will be contacted by Oxford via email once your
Cont’d
account is active.
5
5
5

## Page 61

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and Order an MRT!
• We’ll go in and order from Oxford
• We will fill out their requisition
• We will go over payment options
6
6
6

## Page 62

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
How To Obtain Results In The Oxford Portal
Results will be uploaded to your portal and
Oxford will send you an email notification when
they are ready .
Once you click on the results link in the email, you
will be taken to your portal. You can then click on
the “Download Results” button on the bottom left
corner of the screen.
7
7
7

## Page 63

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 5 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
8
8

## Page 64

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
International Clients
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 65

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
Available Tests For International Clients
The MDP offers many tests to the international market.
We work with labs to get tests to Europe, Australia, Mexico, and some parts
of Africa, Asia and Central America.
We offer foundational tests and non-foundational tests to international
clients.
2
2
2

## Page 66

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
Which Labs & Tests Does The MDP Offer
Labs:
• Nordic
• Precision Analytical
• Nutripath
• NutriSearch
• Vibrant Wellness
• LifeLineDiagnostics
• Mosaic Diagnostics
Tests:
• Hormone Profile • MT Diet
• Intestinal Permeability • Organic Acids
• Food Sensitivity • Mycotoxins
• GI-MAP • HTMA
• Oxidative Damage • And more…
3
3
3

## Page 67

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
Special Pricing For International Orders
• The MDP has special discounts on MDP fees for
international orders.
• Visit the MDP menu, and on the left-hand side
you will see a “more info” button under
International Orders.
• A document will pop up that lists the current
prices of the offers.
• These offers are for foundational labs only.
4
4
4

## Page 68

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
How To Navigate the Menu & Order
International Tests
Go to www.fdnconnect.comand navigate the
Medical Director Program tab. Click on the
MDP menu.
You can find international tests by utilizing the
various filters the menu provides. 1. Search
Bar 2. Screening Categories 3. Lab Name.
5
5
5

## Page 69

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
Important notes:
• To order any of these tests you must follow the process
of ordering through the MDP which we covered in an
earlier lessons of this training.
• Ensure you read the screening details carefully to
understand the cost of the MDP fee, the cost of the test,
How To Order
sample collection instructions and any other
information you need to know that is unique to the lab
International Tests
or test you are ordering.
• Each lab is different, therefore, things such as the
payment method and how to obtain the requisition
form can change.
6
6
6

## Page 70

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and tests!
• We’ll go in and order from the MDP
• We will go over some details when
ordering internationally
• We will go over payment options
7
7
7

## Page 71

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
What Happens Next?
Once you have placed your order, the MDP will process it and send you
a confirmation email.
The MDP’sconfirmation email will contain instructions specific to the
test you just ordered. Information such as sample collection, payment
instructions, and any other info regarding that specific test and lab.
Please read the information carefully to instruct your clients
accordingly.
Oncethe results come in, the MDP will email you the lab results along
witha link to set up a Clinical Advising Session (included in MDP test
fee).
8
8
8

## Page 72

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 6 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
9
9

## Page 73

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Clinical Advisor Sessions
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 74

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
What Are Clinical Advisor Sessions?
Clinical Advisor Sessions are consultations
that FDN grads get to schedule with one of our
Clinical Advisors.
Our Clinical Advisors are graduates from the
FDN program who have mastered their own
practices.
The goal of the Clinical Advisor sessions is to
ultimately increase your client success rate.
The Clinical Advisors can help you see any
blind spots you missed. Having a discussion
with another professional about your client
cases can give you great insight!
2
2
2

## Page 75

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
Clinical Advisor Sessions
Whenever you order a test kit through the MDP you automatically get a Clinical Advisor
session. Once you receive the results report, you will also receive a scheduling link.
Alternatively, you can purchase a Clinical Advisor session for any test that you order outside
of the MDP such as a Fluids iQtest or a test ordered through Evexia.
Clinical Advisor Sessions are widely used by our graduates. These sessions are used to help
increase client success rate and graduates use the sessions for many reasons.
The Clinical Advisor Sessions are meant to help you interpret tests, build protocols, see the
ENTIRE picture, and have a professional discussion about your client cases.
Clinical Advisor Sessions are used by new grads AND well-seasoned FDN Practitioners.
3
3
3

## Page 76

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
The MDP offers different types of Clinical Advisor
Sessions:
• 30 minute session: to interpret 1 test report.
• 60 minute session: to interpret 2 test reports for the
The Different Types of
same client.
• 90 minute session: this is a Case Review session
Clinical Advisor
where you can either go over all 5 foundational labs
or equivalent to 3-4 tests that do not include
Sessions
foundational tests.
• Strategy session: this session is meant to get clinical
questions answered that are not tied to a specific
client case.
• Clarity session: this session is meant for FDN
practitioners to who feel stuck in business or stuck in
their personal life and need some guidance.
4
4
4

## Page 77

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
Let’s Go And Purchase a Clinical Advisor Session
Go to www.fdnconnect.comand navigate to
the Medical Director Program tab. Scroll down
to Clinical Advisor Consults.
5
5
5

## Page 78

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
After You Purchase A Session
You will get an email confirmation within 24
hours that gives you the information you will
need to attend your Clinical Advisor
Consultation.
6
6
6

## Page 79

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
Once you receive your scheduling link, you will be able
to choose the Clinical Advisor you’d like to consult with
and schedule you consult with them.
You will need to follow that CA’s instructions to hand
over your Case Notes and copies of test reports (if
applicable).
Clinical Advisor
FDNs will be charged a late fee of for no-shows or not
Sessions providing a 48-hour cancellation notice to the clinical
advisor.
Processes and Policies A copy of the test results and completed FDN case
notes must be emailed to the Clinical Advisor 48 hours
prior to the scheduled appointment. If required
documents are not provided prior to the appointment,
your appointment may be canceled by the clinical
advisor.
7
7
7

## Page 80

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 7 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
8
8

## Page 81

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
MDP’s Non-Foundational Labs
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 82

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
The Most Popular Non-Foundational Tests
In a survey of your peers, the most common non-foundational MDP labs not already discussed are as follows:
HTMA (Hair Tissue Mineral Analysis)
OAT (Organic Acids)
Mycotoxins
Total Tox
2
2
2

## Page 83

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
While working with a client, you may want more
information to put the pieces of their case together. It is
recommended to run these tests if your clients have
persistent metabolic chaos.
• HTMA: best for mineral imbalances, Hormone problems, adrenal
issues, heavy metals, toxic build up.
Benefits of Non- • OAT: best for mold/candida issues, ASD, ADHD, persistent
metabolic issues, second-tier gut dysfunction.
Foundational Tests
• Mycotoxins: best for known or unknown mold exposure.
• Total Tox: best for toxic build up from environmental factors such
as PFAS, phthalates, pesticides and more.
We also have advanced courses if you want to upgrade your knowledge
on non-foundational labs.
3
3
3

## Page 84

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
How To Navigate The Menu & Order Non- Foundational Tests
Go to www.fdnconnect.comand navigate the
Medical Director Program tab. Click on the
MDP menu.
You can find any non-foundational test by
utilizing the various filters the menu provides.
1. Search Bar 2. Screening Categories 3. Lab
Name.
4
4
4

## Page 85

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
• To order any of these tests you must follow
the process of ordering through the MDP
which we covered in an earlier lessons of
this training.
• Ensure you read the screening details
carefully to understand the cost of the MDP
How To Order Non- fee, the cost of the test, sample collection
instructions and any other information you
Foundational Tests
need to know that is unique to the lab or
test you are ordering.
• Each lab is different, therefore, thing such as
the payment method and how to obtain the
requisition form can change.
5
5
5

## Page 86

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
Let’s Go in and Order Non-Foundational Tests
• We’ll go in and order from the MDP
• We will go over some details when
ordering non-foundational tests
• We will go over payment options
6
6
6

## Page 87

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
What Happens Next?
Once you have placed your order, the MDP will process it and send you
a confirmation email.
The MDP’sconfirmation email will contain instructions specific to the
test you just ordered. Information such as sample collection, payment
instructions, and any other info regarding that specific test and lab.
Please read the information carefully to instruct your clients
accordingly.
Oncethe results come in, the MDP will email you the lab results along
witha link to set up a Clinical Advising Session (included in MDP test
fee).
7
7
7

## Page 88

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 8 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
8
8

## Page 89

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
MDP Policies & FAQs
Presented by
Debora Mendes
1
1

## Page 90

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
MDP Policies
2
2
2

## Page 91

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common Yes. You can reschedule your Clinical Advisor
Session.
MDP Questions:
Although, if you reschedule your session in
less than 48 hrs of your scheduled
appointment, this does count as a
Can I reschedule
cancellation and a fee does apply. We ask for
my Clinical Advisor
you to reschedule or cancel before the 48-hr
Session? limit.
Our Clinical Advisors work hard to prepare for
your session, please respect their time.
3
3
3

## Page 92

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common No. The MDP fee is not the same as the test
fee. The MDP fee and test fee are two (2)
MDP Questions: separate charges.
When looking at a test on the MDP menu, you
will see under the screening details the cost
Does the MDP fee
of the MDP fee and test.
cover the test fee?
Although there are a couple of exceptions,
such as the HTMA, where the MDP fee and test
fee are bundled together. Therefore, read the
screening details of each test carefully.
4
4
4

## Page 93

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common
No. This goes against the MDP policy.
MDP Questions:
If you do not have an account with the lab
you have an inquire about, you must go
through the MDP. The MDP is the liaison
Can I contact between you and the lab.
the lab?
FDN has been trusted to have the MDP
program and we ask graduates to respect
our policies. MDP privileges can and will be
revoked if our policies are not respected.
5
5
5

## Page 94

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common
MDP Questions:
No. The MDP does not pay the lab on behalf of
you or your client.
Does the MDP pay
You or your client are responsible for lab
the lab on behalf of
payments.
my client?
6
6
6

## Page 95

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common
MDP Questions:
When ordering from the MDP, the GI MAP
Where do I find the requisition form is always emailed to you
from the MDP.
GI MAP requisition
form?
7
7
7

## Page 96

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common
MDP Questions:
Please never use your client’s cards to pay for
the MDP fee. This causes confusion for
Can I use my client’s
everyone, and unwanted charges may hit
HSA card to pay for the
your client's card.
MDP fee?
8
8
8

## Page 97

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
Answering The
Most Common
MDP Questions:
Yes. You have the right to pay for your client’s
tests on their behalf.
Can I pay for my
Ensure you understand how to pay for each
client’s test?
test prior to instructing your clients.
9
9
9

## Page 98

Module 15 -Lesson 3 -Video 9 4/29/2025
FDN’s Medical Director Program Training
Presented by
Debora Mendes
10
10

