All right, here we are still in module 15. We've done two videos. In lesson one, I went over some slides. Just kind of walking you through the prop says. And then I recorded the onboarding slash discovery call if you want questions. One through eight. And the rest of this. Listen to here's going to be about you. You've got through those questions. One through eight.
And now you're hired. And so those questions, by the way, they're really worth going through one more time. Really quickly. I know I spent 30 minutes going over each one. So keep in mind, there's the psychology behind each one. And it's going to make you work really, really easy when you ask for the close, you know, basically at the end of number eight.
Let's scale one to ten how important is to solve this. And you go over, you know, I'm a seven eight nine ten. You get them up to a eight nine ten. And otherwise don't onboard them. And so.
And so I just wanted to give you a couple little quick closes or you know call to action. So anything like this, you make it your own. This is me, but you're not me do it your own way, but the, understand what the principles are you have to ask for the order.
You have to ask for the order. You can't say, so what do you think? Because it'll just ask you more questions in the conversation. Okay. So you get around to it something like this, maybe. Alright, Mr. Smith, I really want to thank you for answering all my questions.
Good news for you. Number one, I'm pretty sure I can help you. If you was designed with you or people like you in mind. And my fellow FD and practitioners now, we help a lot of people like you every day to get back and children's health and it starts with the functional lab work and all natural drug free protocols.
So number two, I've decided to skip you into my practice. If we can agree on my terms, would you like to hear what those are? If you'll say yes, you explain. Well, here's how I work.
You must do all five labs and work with me for 90 days to get reasonable results. And so obviously there's some investment on your part and if you'd like, I would like to tell you how to how I charge. Yes, please do so. Okay, there are two fees.
My professional fees plus the lab fees. I charge X amount, whatever you charge for 90-day program. That's my professional fees and the lab fees are about a thousand dollars, maybe a little more.
Now, don't be iffy, don't give too big of a range and get their credit card for your fees. You say, so as soon as you're ready and I'm ready to get started today. So as soon as you're ready, I like to go ahead and order those labs for you.
Would you like to get started today? Would you like to get started today? So that's the best close I know of. Would you like to get started today? But you have to have set it up. The one thing I want to remind you of here is that you've already, when you get to question six, which is about what would hold you back from completing a program, money, time, fear of something, you've already covered all the objections.
And if they bring them up again, then you have to remind them, look, I remember we already discussed that money was important, but that you weren't going to let it hold you back from doing this.
So I'm ready to start today, but only if you're ready to start today. And otherwise, then you're going to go need and reprioritize. Now, you already said that you were 10 on a skill of one to 10 on commitment. So all I need is your credit card and I can get you started today.
And yes, you might feel like, oh, I'm pushing a little bit, but pushing someone a little bit is okay, because what you're doing is helping them make a decision. And my dad told me many, many, many decades ago, you're just helping people make decisions read.
That's all, it's not about selling them anything. They can't be sold, you're going to buy something they don't want. They want it. They just need your encouragement and they need you to ask them to get across the line.
So would you like to get started today, because I'm ready to get started today? And then you'd be quiet. And wherever it is next to other mouth, you should have already covered it in question six, which is about what would hold you back.
Oh, because if they start bringing up well, I'm not sure I have the time, not sure I have the money, not sure I have the commitment, you've already covered those things. This is the easiest simplest part you think is the hard part.
You think this asking them for an order as the hard part, it's not. It's asking them all those other questions that making sure you cover it real well. So that's that. And it's just a sec. We're going to go over another video that's going to explain how to use the case notes.
But I want you to remember just to go to your hired, go to your hired checklist, it's in the document hub, and also in the document hub is the initial contact docs.
So there's an initial contact email template, and you got to send that out. So I'm assuming on the last slide that they said, okay, let me get my credit card.
They give it to you and you charge it right away. And don't wait for two days to charge your credit card. You charge it right away. You can even do it when they're on the phone.
And then then your hired and you say, okay, well, I'll be sending you out some things. You can review this with them once they've hired you. Do not review this stuff until you have gone through the credit card processing or at least got their credit card.
Otherwise, you're wasting your breath through this stuff. I'm encouraging you to do it this way because I know it's what works.
Work for me thousands of times. Lots of it the impact issues are out there using this. And you might find some using saying, I don't do it.
It won't be as successful. And I want you to give it a try first. That's your graduate homework is to give this a try on 5 or 10 or 15 or 20 people. However many it takes.
Also, you need to join the AFD and P because there's lots of other support products in there. There's lots and lots and lots of all kinds of documentation. There's videos I did a couple years ago on how to package and price your services. All that will be explained.
But I want to make sure here in the training session because I could wait until you're graduated to tell you this stuff. I want you to graduate with a feeling of confidence.
And so just go to the document hub get to your hard checklist and the initial context doc get the initial contact email template read it. You can modify it a little bit. Customize it to your liking, but it's really a good template. So templates are other for you to work on.
And you use that by setting out that document. It introduces the forms you're going to be sending. Remember, this is all once payment is received right there. Very important.
So you're going to send out the medical care score card, the left-hand medical history form, the terms of services agreement, which you should get back get back to terms of service agreement before ordering your kids and sending them to the person.
That's a matter of personal trust and preference. I like ordering the kids immediately and assume that they're going to sign that terms of service agreement plus I won't give any kind of consultation if I don't have all three of these documents back.
Now, remember, they're going to fill out those forms. You are going to complete the case notes form on each client. So here in model 15 there's a couple of demo videos when you watched already. So now we're going to watch that next video.
And remember, you're going to send out the lab test kits and all forms including service agreement must be returned before client gets for session with you and all the labs are completed. So let's now go to that video.
Okay, fantastic. Here we are back at the case notes form and the last video ended with question number eight and in this case there are 10 you'd never start with anyone that wasn't at least an eight, my opinion.
You're hired. We just went over a couple more slides about closing and then the you're hired and you've sent out all the forms and you sent out all the test kits. Now it's likely that you can get the person to send back their forms along with the terms of service agreement before they've completed the test kits.
So you can get those and you can put them in your file, you know, your folder for that customer under your clients folder. So you're going to get back to MC score card completed. You'll know the number of points.
You know the other things going on and the terms of service agreement again. Now upon receipt now you'll go to sections nine to 16. This is real simple. This is already filled up for us. And number nine is metabolic case score card total points is increasing or decreasing wherever most points and note any additional symptoms present. So this person has a total of four and 66 points.
62 hormone 70 immune. Well, that's pretty significant. That's a lot of points there and her points might be pointing directly at the symptoms and they might not be. Don't make any assumptions yet because you really don't have the test results yet.
That's good to know. And in addition to her main complaint, which remember was exit pains plus fatigue. Meas is your fatigue constipation can't lose access weight here thinning and satellite.
Well, what does that sound like right there sad here thinning can't lose access weight constipation those are definite the right symptoms just so you know now I recognize that pattern you may not recognize those patterns. But you will start to recognize those patterns. So don't worry about me skipping ahead or going over your head or confusing you in any way.
I'm just saying you might see something there that points the finger for you at additional testing or additional concerns you might have.
Now 10 is list any prescription meds being used currently and you'll just write them all down there and then why did where they would explain why they're taking each medication. And then if you know so okay, you don't know you don't have to look up every drug.
But if you know any side effects, then you could note those down there now she's on synthroid which is low dose for hypothyroidism. Any flammatory is needed for five minutes when she feels extra stiff yes.
And that might be this is the prescription meds. So right away you might start thinking about what first was there any natural replacement for these that you might want first synthroid goes no not really although there are some natural thyroid boosters like you'll find out about those in the supplement section.
Any flammatory and so lots of things you can do that you might be able to help her get off those if she wants to. Now also here's listening over the counter meds currently being used on a regular basis and we know of course she's on pain meds at you know aspirin time or of your profit.
Also takes some hard-working good medication top of a core zone cream and things like that so she's definitely spending a lot of the grocery store or at the drug counter.
So this is where you can save her a lot of money or at least get her on really good natural solid support so people complain about the price of supplements. You could always go back and say well I know that those that aspirin and ton on our burn and of course that none that was free so you've already got a budget for this you just are going to spread it out in a different way.
Correct to that stuff she's taken over the counter and seeds that's the non-stirlative flammatory as needed for pain but she'd push the hurt tummy she feels toxic.
Think increased metabolic chaos yes all the counter drugs increase metabolic chaos just like you know regular drugs like prescription drugs. This did he sub them was currently using regular basis, apparently none.
Listening medical diagnosis well she was told by doctors is fibromyalgia insomnia chronic fatigue syndrome and diagnosed two years ago with hypothyroidism so it's just nice to note what these medical terms are for a cluster of symptoms fibromyalgia.
It's a real thing folks medicine isn't but there's thousands of people diagnosed with it who don't have the real thing they just got the same symptoms.
And so that's why you save most labels or diagnosis or just.
Cost your symptoms now this is where it gets serious because we're going to ask her about her current DRES program and.
You just write it down you know this is out of your lifestyle medical history form she really cooks eat some like your sweet snacks. Another she has her cravings is tried various diets. So what would we call it yeah try cyclotron here rest habits trouble falling asleep staying asleep.
Let's see goes to bed late try things up sleep makes gruginess worse than the day exercise you only walk so she's definitely under exercise stressors.
Original traffic actually three years ago divorce almost three years ago and I'm sure there's others that might have appeared on her list you could write him down. Now what I just review cooking one of the reasons you write the things down.
Is it if you were freeing her out let me just tell you folks how much positions even love to get a thorough history I mean it's unbelievable how much information about a person you're actually able to convey here to someone else in the business.
That's one thing the thing is that you're creating your own record and and a narrative you heard me mention in other videos about how you're creating a narrative. So if you're telling someone else about this person.
You know you can start at the top. Hey, we got this later. You mean you can play this by the blah blah blah blah. And once we got her forms back we further determined that she was had a lot of metabolic case points. She was on synthroid and taken over the counter medication and but told she'd had all these different diseases her diet sucks because she never cooked rest habits are bad. She only walks. You see the narrative that comes out of something like this and that's what I designed it for.
So supplements up above it's didn't list any but now we're sort of rewriting it because that's part of our protocol and she's tried some things but had negative reactions or didn't work so she discontinued.
Last but not least her general medical history. His director we two years ago vaccines is a child. If I remember my other day, he noticed his antibiotics for ear anal allergies was that tell you a lot of things about her gut function probably and that she had ear allergies.
So hey fever car crash divorce metal feelings poor hygiene. Oh man, she's dirty too. So last of this little small section here is question or section 16. What's your initial impression pre lab and this needs to also be a really good narrative.
And so I'm just going to read it. Remember you've been hired. You sent the test kits and forms and you have the forms back.
So here's that written out narrative. A 50 year old female postman apostle from surgery. History of sedentary lifestyle overwork and high stress including both physical trauma from reaction and mental emotional trauma from her divorce multiple medical diagnosis and treatments from standard medicine.
She's definitely caught the cycle of trauma and she's really from her symptoms using prescription meds over the counter remedies. She's gained 30 pounds since the accident but doesn't exercise and has other contributors to metabolic chaos obviously.
She's ready to stop treating the symptoms only and it's seeking real answers. She would be happy to be able to pain and sleep better plus lose a few pounds so she can date and go dancing again straight out of your intake straight out of your onboarding form. She has committed at a 10 and paid in full for 90 day programs.
Again, when we get the results from all five labs and create a program to follow with regular accountability sessions to make sure she's following the program and has support of family and co-workers.
That is a narrative that if you were to refer to a physician for something weird, they would love to get that they don't get from nutritionists and other refers.
They're all clients would never go through it that we don't want to refer we don't want to be left hanging and just don't work. Go call your doctor and over for you. No, we haven't even begun to get to the true underlying causes. That's what the lab works for. We're going to take a two minute break and come right back.
All right folks now we're going to start cooking with gas. So the person that you're working with has sent you the forms and we just completed the section from 9 to 16.
So that's your impression after you've done all your onboarding and you've been hired and you sent them the forms and you got back all these forms. And now you've started to complete your impression form. It's more history. It's more recordings.
You're stuff that you need to know in order to work with this person and have a history never really good taste notes form. Now you're starting to collect lab reports as they come in and remember my best recommendation is that you never.
Have a meeting with that person until you get all the test reports. You can send them an email and say hey I just got your I'm our TA or SAC's peer you're one of these labs here from you know lab and and that you know you're checking to make sure they've already submitted the others they're all really really important.
Now there's other ways you can work with people too for instance you know the MC scorecard you got that back and you have an empty diet let's see if they're they're metabolic tipping diet. Well it's possible to start working with that person just on the diet while you wait.
We're we're kind of getting the rest of the test so that one's easy it's done online and you can get those results no problem. So let's see you're doing that let's see we're going to the empty diet you just getting them to start living the lifestyle.
That's a good thing the left tell is you get up and you eat the right foods and you start using the diet check records sheets in other ways of implementing empty diet. That's perfectly legit. So the first test that you get back is going to be that one and the empty diet.
So you start working on their diet while you're waiting for the labs increasing them make sure we get all these in the labs done. Now that's going to be obviously the metabolic one this panel is just enormous panel because very assessment the MRT and the DSL GI.
So that's our five labs of course specimens but you got this empty diet so start working them with them on the D if you want. Keep in mind that this might depend upon how much you charge them.
You're going to learn how to charge for a 90 day program. One flat fee it should these days probably started around 3,000 go up to about 5,000 real quick. We have 50 in charge of neat $9,000 and sometimes they'll extend it they'll make it more than a 90 day program.
But I'm strongly strongly recommending you keep it to the book here. We have to find it until you have had a few clients in your normal better. But again you can do the empty diet separately.
I wouldn't do labs for the time ever because once the labs begin that's when the 90 day program is supposed to begin that's what we told them. The 90 day program begins to get all the labs and have your first real R&R. So I've done it for many many many years as like all at once. I don't tell them about the empty diet until anything until that day one in the 90 day starts.
So you're going to find a way around that. Remember it's you doing it not me. So feel free to be creative. As long as you stick to the rules, so to speak, the principles, the principles. Thank you.
I've already got a preliminary point of view or assessment of this person. We call it Impression for me. But now you're really going to form an impression. You're going to list here the name of the lab the day completed the lab findings include recent labs, client ran previously if any. So if you just happen to have a very recent lab that this person has run, you could add that in there. Now we're going to just name of the screen. MC scorecard.
Four or 56 points total. MT diet. She's a person with that. In other words, protein type. Media released test 39 foods.
It's just a hormone panel. Catabox state, circadian rhythm problems. Low AM elevated PM exhaustive phase.
Low testosterone, low-pregisteral, low-estrogen high-mellatone at noon. That's not good and low-sigatory IGA. That's sort of chronic infection kind of thing. You guys know what those mean.
But that's kind of how you write it. Metabuk wellness panel positive indicator elevated 80HTG or another oxidative stress and elevated urinary balance. It's so liver. Not so good.
It'd be because of barrier assessment elevated Zynealine elevated histamine and elevated histamine to ratio. So you should know what that means.
And then the GIMMAP, one main thing was H. Pylori. So you know, bad getting worse kind of a thing here.
And then six and 18 clinical correlation and post lab impression based on entire consolation and feeding opportunities. This is where you want to answer the questions to the lab results have explained the client symptoms.
Rarely that they don't, but write it in. What is your impression now that you have the lab screening results?
And what we would say is, "Hey yeah, all this stuff's just going on. There's a very high clinical correlation between the lab data and how the client is showing up for presentation, if you will.
The lab data show multiple healing opportunities including hormone balancing, poor digestion and assimilation, poor gut and detoxification function, chronic immune system issues. That's been sent in and contributes to metabolic chaos, such as foods that she sensitive to an infestation that H. Pylori.
The research lab data provides clues about why the client feels like she does and why her body is not functioning normally. And how makes me why the client is suffering, why she feels the way she does.
The good news that these observations can be leveraged by a health-building principles inherent in if the address for health success program.
It would appreciate to have a long time to get this way, even with physical and mental emotional trauma, she went to her three years ago. She will be challenged with forming new habits to go through all three phases of self-care.
And you guys remember that's relief care, corrective care, and then maintenance care.
And back to the text, watch for healing crises and support client as needed. Lab data should provide her with hope and additional motivation. And it will, and it does. People will realize they've got a lot to do.
Now there's lots of things we could go on and talk about. Initially here, we're just going to do the customized dress program and write it out for her. This by the way, you can pretty much almost cut and paste into her summary sheet.
So what I really want to stress to or emphasize to is that we should be always handing the person to dress summary sheet. And that's like your email every time you talk to them, you know, any modification.
So looking at document hub for the dress summary sheet, I can even maybe show you a quick example of one, and maybe I'll do that. But in here on the case notes form, writing the diet, bounce for your mental bug type, raises approaching fast and curved plus fat on his middle and he extends if he's water, etc.
Write all that stuff down in there. So it makes you put the percentages right in here. You get that right off of the metabolic typing report. It's the only place you can find it. It's on there, your clients, metabolic typing report and write these percentages in here.
Because that's their starting point, you know, they'll dial it in using the diet set record sheets, but that's what you got to do. Rest, you know, what you're recommending right at in exercise, what you're recommending right at in.
Stress reduction, same thing supplements that will go on in 90 day protocol sheet. I'm right there in here. See 90 day protocol sheet and then client feedback.
I like to ask them so how committed are you to following this dress? You said you were in eight before or nine, and now they go, well now that you're showing my tiff results, I'm a 10, that's fantastic.
So I'm really quickly here. I just wanted to pop this in and show you the personal dress for health statistics summary. There it is on one page. I made it really important to make it one page.
And the office where I invented dress, I was just any people a sheet one sheet. I didn't want to give them to and have to staple it or anything like that. So I literally would have this written up just like this. You can see it's very generic.
Right there name in right to date of the visit and every time they came in, I would give them a new personal dress for health statistics summary. I'd review what they've been doing for the last week or so.
It was easier back to maybe because they were coming in for carapractic and acupuncture and other treatments. They were coming by the office anyway and I would catch them just for sometimes 10 minutes or 15 minutes. Sometimes a little longer.
But I had a lot of work to do around the office and that's why I over the FDN course you might notice that way read does everything really fast.
I take a long time to explain things but when I meet with clients it's really quick. They need to understand this is my program. This is how I do it. Here's how I work five labs then we're going to meet once in a while and we're going to go over the dress program that I customized for you.
And you're going to tell me how well you've been doing. And then I took it up with each visit. You're going to see that the diet, rest, exercise, dress, or something.
Some kind of modifications might be made. And so even back then though you can see like right down here it's a C90 D3 period of protocol attached.
That was added once I started doing everything online. But I would hand it to them along with their DRES instructions.
And this is written if you read through this one go to the document hub find the dress real estate summary. Read through it. You'll see how wonderfully beautifully just it's exact.
It's just here's what you do in the DRES. It's very generic, very 30,000 foot view. And yes, there's going to be discussion about those things. You're going to tune it up for a person.
But the principles never change and explain really well here. So I wanted to add that in to the other different ways to use it. You can send this to them as an attachment after every visit.
Even virtually just just filling up. I probably wouldn't do that. I probably would cut and paste this. Just go ahead and cut and paste it into an email.
So they get the same email every time after a visit with you. And then they're supposed to follow it until your next visit.
And the length of time between visits is going to vary depending on the person. But you always want to send them this afterwards.
And by the way, you're also going to be filling out your notes. So let's go back to the notes. So we just reviewed a handy little tool that I like.
The dress for health success summary sheet is a matter of fact that's all the dress program was literally started as one sheet.
And I used in the office people were coming in for the required practical and accurate puncture and massage and nutrition. And they got it on the fly. They got it fast. Once I had done the work and with them on boarding and been paid.
And I would give them the lab test kits to go home with. And then they'd come back and we'd go over those and I would give them a customized once sheet set of instructions.
And I'd go over that with them each time. Now, I also, depending on who they were to the office, if it was a chiropractic patient, that's where I got the idea of case notes. They're always had to be case notes.
So while I might hand them one piece of paper, I would go to their file. This is back when everything was paper and you just wrote in there and keep notes. And so this case notes form is the outgrowth of that.
And it's really an excellent way if you review the whole thing all at once. So let's go back to the notes here and talk about section 20 session progress course correction notes emails don't count in a way they do. But what counts the most is notes. That's your permanent record. And when I see you mail does count all the little emails back and forth. That's all stuff I don't do.
I don't do back and forth emails. And let's just answer a question about how to get a lab test done or when is our next session.
And if they do email me, I probably would not get back to them to the next day and I'd say, look, we have an appointment on this date. We're going to talk about it then.
Because let's say, hey, look, I'll give you a hundred bucks an email extra or something like that. It's just that's not how you run a business. You can't run your business that way. If that sounds harsh, you can do it anyway you want, as long as you stick to these principles and keep notes.
So you want to assess compliance and non-compliance in each area of dress and note any course corrections you recommend. Provide on a feedback and appropriate apperration or admonishment. Appervation means, hey, that's good job. Admonition is, hey, I think you could do better here, right? What do you think?
Because that's your job as to hold the client accountable, coach them up, teach them the why. So you want to go back to the metabolic typing diet. Reason we follow that. The reason why is because you have genetic requirements that are met better by following this diet.
And the better you follow your genetic requirements, the more likely this you're going to get healthier and live longer, be happier. And so and so. So I was given the why. And then make any notes right on your form. You can do them by hand. If you're seeing them in person, you could type right in there. If you don't online and all these different ways of getting it done. But note progress on their main complaint, both subjectively and objectively. If you keep.
So update you just summary sheet for the client. Okay. So you put in the date. And then you kind of grade them on the progress. So Lydia, your original main complaint was most likes and paints including fatigue. And I want to know how that's changing. Better or worse. Well, she says, well, it's still worse at night, but it's getting better, especially in the daytime. I had a couple of good nights sleep. Excellent.
Good progress. There's your information. Now, let's go on to diet. You're a person with a diet. You're protein and fat type, limit carbs and low glycemic vegetables. Let's take a look at your DCR sheets. And you look and you see that she's not really doing it. She's still cheating. I'm still eating. You know, carrots and they're in my bed list and all these different things. So you say, look, how well do you think that you're doing?
How well do you think you did on this? My job is to try to get you to 80 to 100%. Well, I think I probably did it 50%. All right. We'll give it a great 50%.
But if she says, oh, I think I'm at 80%. You say, no, Mrs. Smith, look, look what's on your DCR. It's you're not. You're only at about 50%.
See, because if you let them slide with, okay, 80%. You're ready. Well, they're not really doing the program. They're not really going to get the results. And then the results is your bionum.
Well, I followed it at 80%. Let's see. Oh, you're not saying they were following you at 80%, 90%. Well, then why aren't they getting results? And so you have to downgrade them so that they know they have to do better.
So they do better and so they get better results. Your job is to do your part to get results. So now they got to do all the work. But your job is to grade them and don't let them get away with anything.
So now Lydia, how's your sleep going? Did you improve your sleep hygiene? Have you turned off all the lights? Have you made it soundproof?
Or started listening to your meditation? And she says, yeah, that's one area I can really thank you for. My sleep hygiene is much better. I'm turning the temperature down and doing all the sleep hygiene things that are in the protocols.
And I do, if I haven't told the breathing and meditation you taught me, or I go to that app that you told me about. Okay, well, how do you think you did? I think I'm at 75, 80%. Well, let's, let's just keep it 75. It sounds like you are working hard at that. So I'm going to, I'm going to give you a 75%. If you keep that up and get it to 85 or 90%. Just imagine how much better you're going to feel.
And what that's going to mean long term for your recovery. Now exercise. Well, I'm still walking, but I'm doing it every day now and I'm trying to walk a little fast, but no, I haven't joined it, Jim. I haven't hired a personal trainer. I haven't left it anyways. I'm just walking. All right. Well, Lydia, for right now, you know, I'm going to, I'm going to let you get away with the 60. But that's not good enough to get the results that you want.
Especially since, like, we got 90 days, few to form these habits. And so we want to really get it up to speed. No stress reduction. Oh, yeah. I'm working on that read. I went to a career practic and I got a massage and it feels a little more tall, right? I think that I'm doing better. Now, when you grade these, I want to keep you to keep this in mind. It's not how much better.
Don't say 70% better, 80% better. And that's not what it's compliance. Like in other words, if you said, Oh, I haven't really done anything or gone anywhere, followed in and give her a zero.
No, right now we're here. We're giving her 60% on compliance, not on the results she's getting. Don't let that fool you. And then the supplements, she was at 65% you can figure that out. Have you started taking them all?
No, I'm still in the first three, but I'm sequencing and self-titrating according to the 90th plan. These grades here might be too good for her. Maybe don't be afraid to give people 20% or zero. 30% because remember down the road, if you've been letting them cheat, then they're not going to get the results and it will be partly because you let them cheat.
And you know what they're going to say? Oh, yeah, that FDN practitioners really nice person, but it didn't really work.
I didn't work because you graded them to I. If you let them know, well, you're not following the program, then they can't blame it on the program. They can't say, well, that didn't work. They can only say that didn't work if they did it at 90%. And they could say it's not working.
You get the point, I hope. So additional comments and assessments advice connected to continuous plan increase intensity of workouts such as Ed stairs.
Now it's kind of a simple said that's you could have wrote that down by the way in your stress reduction here and you could put that on the summer sheet and hand it to him.
How do we want to do it? But it's important to continue as planned. You always want to continue as planned. So let's talk for a minute about how often you're going to see these people. In a 90 day plan, you know, I wouldn't see them.
I've seen people as little as three times, four times, six times, nine times, but probably never more than ten times in a 90 day program. That would be once every 90, nine days or basically once a week. So that's a lot. So you once a week's fine for the first month. So that'd be four.
And then for the second month, every other week, that's two more visits. So now you're at six and you got one more month. If you saw them twice during that month, that would be eight visits.
And then one to close at nine visits. That's what they're going to get. So you've got to be, got to hold them accountable here. I don't want to say be hard on it. Be loving, be give them careful and appropriate approbation or admonishment, depending on what's appropriate at the time.
Be shy because they're older than you or make more money than you or anything. You're the expert in the room. They're there to follow your program or drop out or you dismiss them.
Now here's another progress report. Mostly like some pain's cleavage. Not as bad during the night. It's feeling a little better. Well, when you purify your body and you start doing the things that are required, then that's what happens.
Here we still give them just a 60. She's been a 3D series does better at 10 or then at breakfast, skip slumps most days. That's not even a bad thing. She's trying to lose weight, but still we just gave her 60. Hey, you got to do better at every meal.
Now, rest, remember that she had made the most improvement there. Has been consistent getting bid before 10. Sign up for that breath calm app that I told you about. And she's really feeling good. Well, that does a lot of good for person. Still walking and try to steer your twice feels like she's getting stronger. Good for you. Approvation, approbation, approbation.
And here the stress reduction is using the tapping modules on breathe.com for mental emotional stressors has eliminated most red foods on the diet. Remember, you can get them off all the yellow and red of course, but keep track of that here under stress reduction, or you could keep track of that up here in the diet.
I want to know they're falling their metabolic typing diet. Minus the foods of course, the MRT foods. But if you want to put the MRT down as one of the stressors, that's fine. It may be a belongs to you.
So she had eliminated most red foods. Started on these prior to protocol. Doesn't feel too good. Is staying hydrated. So you give her, you know, 65% and say good for you. Keep it going. You got it. You got to push through.
I told you when you don't feel good from the protocol, then you stay hydrated. You could back off maybe one capsule per day, see if that eliminates some of that not feeling so good.
People get nauseous and have detox symptoms just from two or three. And they spread earlier protocols probably six caps a day. So you got a lot of room to play with the titration there. And the supplements, she's only halfway through her sequencing and titration and started the age.
So we can get better than 50% 65% so additional comments and assessment. This is a good client. Client is on a narrower pathway. Learning to manage your health. Feels like she's gaining control. Remember control control. That's what we want. If you put control back of the hands of your clients, they will love you for that.
We just mean with there, let's say once a week here for the first month, then we're going to go down the line. We're going to do more progress notes and more progress notes. There's lots of room here for several.
You can always add to this. You know how to add to a word document. You basically highlight the whole section that you want to duplicate in your press copy and paste and it will just add another group of notes.
You could also delete this highlight all this. That's every line there. And then you would just hit the delete button and it will get rid of one of these for you. Now that's a pretty good stretch.
I think what it might do is just sort of stop and have another video after this one.
