Fantastic folks, and now you're going to see the method to my madness. It's onboarding and managing your clients. Now, hopefully you get it and now your client must get it too. So this lesson is about our intake methods and documents used. We basically could call it onboarding. And now that you know how much work it is to look at the labs, interpret the labs, get clinical correlation.
And then present a protocol, at least you know how it's supposed to go. You're going to have to practice it of course. And we're going to help you through practicing it a little bit.
But I wanted to teach you that first, so that when you got to the onboarding, you would know exactly what's expected from your client exactly what they're going to have to go through. So if I had taught you the conducting of FDN business in order, like here's how you get a client. Here's how you hook them up basically or sign them up for your services. And now here's all the labs you have to run. And then here's all the protocol information.
You know, then it would be backwards in my mind. You know, I just just really want you to know as we cover onboarding new clients with that paradigm that you're going to do an awful lot of good for them.
The paradigm also is that we don't diagnose the treat anything specifically. We look for healing opportunities and then help a person heal everything, everything, non-specifically. And we trust where that's going to go. You've heard me say it that the general principles of health building outperform specific treatments. And they've tried all that stuff anyway.
So onboarding with a paradigm that you're not going to make any guarantees, you're not going to diagnose a treat anything specifically is really important for you to get that, as I said. And now your client has to get it to.
So that means creating the right expectations. And of course there's always closing the deal. Don't let anyone tell you that there's no sales in the health business.
We all are altruistic. We all would do it for nothing if we could. We all just want to help people. And some of us dislike sales, but every business needs sales.
Sales is actually withdraw from marketing of your business. It's the need for sales. You need to close some deals. You need to onboard some folks. So rather than calling it sales, which is what it is, we'll call it onboarding.
We need to onboard some folks. And we'll cover once the deal is closed, how to email them. They're intake forms, getting them the kids. And then a place to start starting on something.
Could be just diet, hydration, going to bed on time. Could be a lot of things that you know they're going to need to do anyway once you get the test results.
So you've learned the Fibalab intake method. You've also learned very much a lot about each of the five habits addressed for health success, including how to recommend supplements.
Out of put the 90% of the code sheet together. Are you an expert yet? No, not from where I'm sitting. You might be, but you know, as you go through this course, you're going to become quite, quite an expert.
And then you're still going to have to go out and get four or five or six clients and more or less practice on them after that, the sky's the limit.
So I want you to know, and this is again, a paradigm you want to have going into a situation where you're going to be asking someone or engaging with someone to see if you can help them and see if they want to hire you.
So sales in our business is about getting hired and successful outcomes are dependent on individual limitations.
Some of which may be hidden in complexities in the mind and emotions of the individual you're working with. You have little or no control of your people or outcomes.
But we can control who we work with. Now what I just said up there is that some of the limitations are in their heads and you don't have to work with people whose hidden complexities are so complex that they interfere with that person healing.
So as we know what we do works, they just got to do it and they may have limitations as to what they could do. So that means you got to pre-screen upfront who you want to work with.
Only work with people that you really think you're going to do a good job. It says here, successful outcomes are the result of careful consideration of which clients to work with and creating realistic and reasonable expectations.
So when you're talking to somebody about them hiring you, they're not interviewing you. You're interviewing them to see if they have reasonable expectations and is that a basis of working together and them hiring you.
Are onboarding an intake, remember? We don't diagnose a treat anything specifically. Healing opportunities are identified by taking careful histories and correlating them with results from well chosen labs.
And these are labs that I know I know these labs and I've run thousands of them, a thousands of people. That's why I say they're well chosen because they're in others. These are the ones I found help the most in a holistic lifestyle program. Now if you want to treat specifics, you want to play doctor.
Go ahead. Good luck with that. But that's not if the end. And you could run other labs. There's people say I run this and I run that. Yeah, and they're treating specifics where they want to admit it or not. That's what they're doing.
So these ones are the test results are just sort of obscure enough that we can say we're not diagnosed with treating anything specific. If there's something specific to treat, they will be self-treating such as with the GI pathogen screen.
And so they are self-treating. We are assisting them with healing the body, healing the host. And so you really need to have these words flow if you're tongue and be able to say them with certainty.
So here's how we work. It's kind of completes the following tests and forms. What's listed here in your screen. What you've been studying for the last couple months. Now we also have them fill out some forms. Remember we got to take a careful history. Metabock, KS, Gore-Credit, Drenos Trist causes medical history form.
Of course, if one has to sign a terms of service agreement that they understand what we said, not diagnosing, not treating anything specific, and there'd be no guarantees. And over at refunds. So we're going to keep very good notes in every person. We're going to run these labs.
And between talking to a person and them hiring you, some of this is going to have to get across pretty well to them. So as I've said, resolving Metabock chaos takes a knowledgeable practitioner as you.
And a willing, enable participant. Able means nothing really super major stands in their way, especially in terms of those mental and emotional limitations. So people can't get out of bed. And I highly recommend that you don't work for those people. Don't let them hire you. And I meant they can't make themselves get out of bed. I didn't mean their legs were broken.
You know what I meant. So we're going to go over the onboarding interview, forming your initial impression, which you can do just talking to someone, deciding if you want to accept them into your practice and closing the deal. If you want onboarding.
And being in agreement, in agreement, not just being in an agreement, but you truly agree on everything, at least enough to move forward agreement. And then in taste forms. Right expectations of the basis of a successful outcome.
Because if you promised little and deliver a lot, you know, it'll be a very pleasant surprise for them and good business for you. You actually will have help somebody. So let's cover the call and things to do during the call. This isn't overview.
So we'll go through these things in more detail. But I always like to set the goal for the call. And you know, I'm always thinking the person for being on the phone with me. And thanks for getting together.
Doesn't matter if I called them or they called me, usually I'm following up on a lead. It could be a referral. It could be the attended one of my workshops and they turned in a survey with their name and phone number on and I'm calling them and saying, hey, I really want to thank you for attending my workshop.
You know, I hope you picked up some tips, but you know, since we're talking, you know, the goal for today is to see if I can help you with your health concerns. It's really not to get their life story yet.
I don't need to know the name of the kids or any of that stuff. The goal for today is to see if I can help you.
Because there's no sense talking about it if I can't help you. So if you'll let me ask you a few questions, we can decide later if working with me is something you'd like to do. Something you'd choose to do.
So you'd take the pressure off. There's no pressure. I'm not going to heart sell you. The goal for today is to see if I can help you with any of your health concerns.
And of course, you always want to express some appreciation for their time. Simple enough, right? Now then you need to get an impression. Remember, kind of like a job interview. You want to know if you even want to work there.
You know, so, you know, it's like that. You know, the boss wants to interview you to see if you would hire you, but really you're just as much in the game in terms of do I want to work here.
So do I want to work for this person? That's what I'm always deciding. I need to form an initial impression. Remember, they have to be willing and able.
And, you know, we help the able to become more able. If someone's able, you know, if they can get out of bed and kind of do the right thing, get some guidance, pay attention, learn, put some of your things into action. They're going to get better.
And you want to know if they're able to do that. If they got some weird hangups that they're not going to be able to do it, that could be something in their own head, like we said, something in their mind or emotions, or maybe it's a third party.
Worse, believe me, if there has been a wife, it doesn't want them to do it. You better get them in the room and talk to them too. So there's eight main questions to ask. And then you have to decide there's really is a point which you go, all right, look, I think I can help you.
Or not. If you decide that they're wacky and you don't want to work with them, they get something going on and you just choose not to. Just say, I don't think I can help you. However, I know this person down the street or I, you know, I got someone I can refer you to. Hopefully you can sort of hand it off to someone else.
Now, if you say I think I can help you, then you have to explain how you work. Is it okay if I tell you how I work? Yes, sure, tell me. You tell them step one step two step three. If it's okay, I'll tell you how it charge now. Would you like me to tell you how it charge?
Yes, sure. You go over it. If your fees are to lab fees, cash, check or credit card, how do you like to pay? Or even then you can do a trial close, which is basically seeing does that sound like something you're ready to do?
And then they might say, well, yeah, maybe, then they would have some other questions. You know, these kids can my doctor get them for me to say no, your doctor doesn't do this kind of lab work. And you know, other questions like that doesn't sure it's cover it no, insurance doesn't cover it.
This is just between you and me and the lab, you're going to pay me my fees. You're going to pay the lab their fees yourself testing and you're going through it. So anyway, we'll go through each of these things. I meant to only just give you the main points, but you know how I get talking.
So you're going to reclose and collect payment. You do the trial close. Does that sound like something you like to do? Do you sound like something you're ready for? And then you're going to, they might say, yeah, let me get my credit card.
That's what I shoot for. And you take the credit card over the phone and then you go on. But if they have some, if you say, you know, you think you're ready for that now, because I'm ready to get going right away. I'm ready to get going right now.
So all I need is to click payment and then I can get the kits and the forms to you and things. They go, well, you know, like I said, they had those objections insurance or just my doctor run these or whatever it might be. They might ask how much or the supplements going to be.
What are you going to try to sell me next? Just handle whatever it is. Then click payment. Then you can let them know what the next steps are. Personally, if I haven't collected payment, why would I tell them what's next? They're not ready for what's next. They're not doing what's next.
If they insist, I could tell them a little bit about lab kit logistics and what you need to do is tell them how easy this and it is really easy. But again, if you haven't collected payment and you start telling them about the lab logistics, they might back out. Oh, boy, this sounds complicated.
So I want you to know, this is not theoretical. I've done this hundreds of times. Thanks for getting on the phone with me today. I really appreciate the goal for today's to see if I can help you with health concerns. I really like to help you.
If I can ask you a few questions, we can decide later if working with me is something you would like to do. So let's get started. We'll go over the eight questions.
And then I'll decide at the end of the eight questions if I think I can help them or not. And I let them know. I think I can help you. So would it be okay if I tell you how I work now?
Yeah, tell me. And then when some know what that is, say, so that's how I work. Is it okay if I tell you how I charge? They go, yeah, and I tell them. Then I say, would you like to get started?
Or would you like to get started today? Or I'm ready to roll. Let's get going. Then they may have some exceptions. They may not. They may have some objections or questions.
And you answer those. I can tell you later on perhaps, you know, what the most common objections are and how to answer. But after that, you've got to ask for a decision again. So I'm ready to roll. Let me know when you're ready. Ready? Ready?
And then they have to say, yes, you know, they've got to pay you. Only then, what's their getting their credit card and they're writing it down. And I'm, you know, going to charge them whatever it is. My fees all upfront, all upfront, five labs. They'll pay later the fees for that. My fees are all upfront.
And only once I got that, okay, double check, you know, expiration date and the whole thing, you just do it over the phone. And by the way, all of that should not take you more than half an hour, but definitely no more in 40 minutes.
Like a good sales call should be done fairly quickly. And by the way, let me put this in here. A lot of times should be talking to someone and they've already heard me do a lecture.
It's amazing how many people get a hold of an FDN practitioner. And they'll say, I listen to read Davis on a podcast on an interview. I've listened to a couple of this webinars.
I saw him on this show or that show, whatever it might be. And so I started looking around and believe it or not, a friend of mine knows an FDN. Oh my God.
You know, so they've kind of already ready. You know, it's just a matter of you helping them make that decision. And so then only then, do I tell them about, okay, I'm going to put the kids in the mail and you get the kids call me if you have any questions.
Read the instructions thoroughly. You know, on and on and on. You just tell them exactly how to do it. And that's partly why we had you do some kids as part of this course.
You're going to explain it to them, all the things they do. And then, and then, you know, you let them know that you're going to email them.
Your agreements, your agreement and intake forms. They're going to have to fill those out. They're going to get the kids in the mail and the whole Shabbang.
And you are in business. You have been hired. You are now have a new client. And it's a wonderful thing to be in charge of your own destiny and be able to work out of your home.
And do this or if you're in the office, you know, you can do this in the office. It's not much changes.
I find it if I've met them at a workshop, very easy to close over the phone. Very easy to onboard. Once they've met you at a workshop and they see you.
You know what, they're only going to talk to you if they like you. And that's enough for now. So the interview, how do we form that initial impression, decided if we're going to work with that person?
You've called qualifying a prospective client that are eight main questions to ask before a SEP thing.
So if I have a lady on the phone or a man on the phone and they, you know, you're okay. Yeah, thanks for coming to the workshop or I got your name from someone so or heard you want to interview or podcast or, you know, you're in the grocery store talking to someone else and you gave me a business card.
You know, or whatever it is, you don't want to touch that very much. You want to see if you can help this person. So okay, well, thanks very much. And no, I don't need to hear all of that right now. What happened in 1942, or your complete history.
I don't need your complete history at this time. If you just tell me, what does your main health complaint? What is the one thing about the way you look or feel that you'd like to change?
What's your main complaint? If I had a magic wand, what's that one thing? Oh, it's my fiber my algebra. It's my skin. It's my weight. It's my brain fog. It's my sinusisologist fatigue, moodiness, irritability, you know, whatever it is.
It's really important. First of all, I mean health complaint. We asked for one because we can't solve 20 problems. That's not fair. That's not a good deal for you. Your best deal that you could make is to find one and maybe two things. But that's it.
And then how often does a body of you, if it's only once a year, they're not going to hire you. If it's, you know, every day, then you have a better chance. So how often does a body of you? Oh, it's three times a week.
But it isn't, you know, four or five times a month, then they're probably not going to do anything about it. It's got to be at least once a week, right? Something like that. So now how long has this been going on for? It's really critical. And you keep them on track and you're trying to not to lift the person wander off on their conversation and, you know, things just keep them okay. Well, that's good. That's good. All right. So it's your migraine headaches and it's been bothering you five times a week.
And you're in a dark room with your head under a pillow two or three of those days. That's, that's really bad. I'm sorry to hear that. That's not normal. You know, you never say to them. What's your main complaint? My great. Okay, great. Now let me ask you often to survive you every day. Okay, great. You don't say okay, great. You never say okay, great. You say, oh, that's horrible. That's not normal. At least say that's not normal.
Now, this is a biggie. This is going to take a little time. And this is where the, like I said, you could do all of this in 20 minutes. Easy. And then trial close. And then you got 10 more minutes of kind of answering objects.
You're, you're at about a half an hour and they should be getting their credit card. And that's the only way you're going to help them. The only way you could help this person is if they hire you.
So what you may complain about this body of homes would go in on for if it's only been a week or two weeks. They're not going to hire you because it hasn't been going on. They haven't been suffering long enough.
What's going on for two years? You, that's not normal. I'm really sort of here that's, that's not normal. So I really hope I can help you know, let me ask you the next question. What have you tried so far has not worked.
Because if it worked, you wouldn't be here, you know, and if it worked a little bit, you can tell me, but you know, what have you tried so far for your migraine, your skin, your diarrhea, you know, whatever it is. Okay, I tried this. I tried that. I tried this and you make notes, man. You're cranking out the notes. Remember, the case notes form. These are the questions. So, do you got to know that stuff? Okay. So you got, you got bad skins for bothering you every day for three years.
And you've tried creams, you've tried pills, you've tried all these different things. You've been to five people and none of them self to you.
So let me ask you this. What's it preventing you from doing? How is this affect your life? What does it prevent you from doing? You can even be honest. I mean, be really honest and say, because, you know, if it doesn't affect your life, then, you know, I'm not sure you're going to be motivated enough to do some of the things I ask you to do.
So I need to know how does this affect your life or what does it prevent you from doing? How does this keep you from being happy?
That's the bottom line. How does this keep you from being happy? Because believe it or not, I've gotten up to one, two, three, four and I thought, "Jesus, this is terrible."
And then I say, "Well, does this affect your life and they go, "Oh, I get by. I'm fine." Well, it's not that much.
You know, this is a person who's playing a game with you. They're going to try to get out of you what is your program. So they're playing the game.
They've told the story to 20 people. My main complaint bothers me every day. It's going up for 10 years. I've tried this. I've tried that.
And when you ask them, "How does this affect your life?" If they don't say that it makes me miserable, or, you know, I, you know,
that, you know, that not having enough energy means I can't play with my kids. I can't do my job. I can't go. Whatever it might be, they've got to admit it affects their life.
And again, if they say, "Oh, I get by." It means they're sort of doing a dance and they're not going to commit to you.
But doesn't really affect me. They're not going to commit to you. They're just going through this process because that's what they do with every practitioner.
And then they try to get out of you what is your deal and what do you do? And, you know, and they're not going to do it, but they're just playing a game.
And it's a little aggravating, but you know, you will find people who do that. And so, if I might stop them there and go, "Well, look, if it doesn't, if you get by, it's just fine."
And what are we doing here? Why would you change it then? Why would you hire me if it's just fine? Everything's funky, Dory. You get by, like you said.
And they make change their tune. But if you don't call them out on it, it would take a little bit of gum center.
You know, it takes, it takes being a real health coach, it takes being the boss over what you do. It takes, it means this is my program, sir, or madam.
And I only work with people who are motivated. And if this doesn't affect your life, then why are you going to do the things I ask you to do?
You know, you're not going to change anything. Why would you, you know, okay, get the point. So you've asked five questions so far, and they've told you it does affect your life, and it does make them unhappy, because it prevents them from doing certain things.
Or feeling a certain way, whatever it's something about the way they look or feel that they actually want to change. And if you believe they want to change, then you ask them, "Well, listen, I need to ask you this."
And who are what, whether it's fear or money or time, could stop you from completing a health rebuilding program?
Let's say I wanted to take you on as a client. You know, who are what would stop you? Or who will support you? Same kind of thing.
Sometimes it's really important that a client says some support, and it's really important that they don't have someone or some thing that is really preventing them from completing a health rebuilding program.
You know what I mean, just signing up. I mean finishing it. I mean following it through. So the emphasis is on completing here. Who are what?
And they might say, "Well, I have tried a few things before they didn't work, so I kind of fear it's not going to work on me, your program. Even I heard amazing things about it."
Or, you know, "Well, if it's too expensive, I'm not sure I'm going to be able to afford it." And, you know, or I don't really have enough a lot of time.
You know, whatever. You're going to be forming your impression about this person and do you want them as a client?
Now, first money and time and things like that go, you can talk a little bit about there.
So, slow down a little bit and just say to them, "Look, money. We're not going to talk about money yet. You know, I haven't decided that I can help you yet.
You know, money is usually something that people have the wrong impression about. You know, a lot of people think that it's going to cost them.
Really, it's an investment. It's going to come back to you by resolving your problem. You know, you've had migraines. You came and go to work.
So, yeah, I guess money is a problem. You know, like since you don't work. But what if you can't go back to work?
So, you really, you know, might be very wise to make an investment like this. Anyway, there's just ways to talk about those things.
And time's the same thing. You know, time is what you put your attention on. You'll do what you put your attention on.
And, you know, this is a fairly simple program, but you are going to have to be committed. So, why don't we, you know, answer two more questions from me.
What would you reasonably expect to achieve while working with me? Like, you know, you may complete this in this. Going off for two years every day.
Try it all this different stuff. You told me to fix your life. Like, it ruins your workouts and you're overweight because of that or it ruins your your love life or something.
And, you know, but you've said also that you got a wonderful spouse is going to support you and people at work are cheering you on.
So, that's fantastic. So, what would you reasonably expect to achieve while working with me? They're usually going to give you something reasonable.
Well, it's just like to have more energy and lose a few pounds. I would like for these headaches to be gone.
I would like for my sinuses to clear up. I would like for my butt to stop itching.
You know, whatever it is, they're going to tell you, it's reasonable. Then you say, "I have to ask you when that's a question. On a scale of one to ten, how important is to dissolve this?"
And let me warn you, it's very difficult to help people who aren't a 9 or 10. So, are you a 9 or 10? And they should say yes. Yeah, I'm a 9 or 10.
And if there are six or seven, tell me what I want to tell you, I haven't had good results for people who are six or seven because they really don't follow through well enough.
So, six or seven might sound good to you, but for me, and you know, I really want you to make improvements. I really want you to achieve the goals.
And six or seven very often isn't committed enough. So, you really ask them on a scale of one to ten, how committed are you?
And you have to have these frank discussions. Now, this is to me what hardcore coaching is. It's getting to these things. And it's very business oriented too. You know, it's your business.
It's helping people with their main complaints, but a bother them for a long time. And a bother them and enough to kind of ruin their life. And, you know, they're going to have to make a commitment. So, it's really important you go through things.
Now, if they say, let me give you a trick, if they say I'm a 7, say, "Well, look, you know, each of the least I take, but I want everybody to be a 9 or 10." So, why don't we see if we can get you to be a 9 or 10?
Since like seven isn't real low, how come you're not a 5 or 4? And this is amazing. They go, "Well, I'm not a 4 because I do want to solve this. It does affect my life. I mean, it's been going on for so long.
And I've tried all this stuff and I've spent all this money. And you know, it's every day, it's things buying me and stuff like that. So, that's why I'm not a 4. I'm a 7. I go, "Okay, well, where are you 9 or 10?"
And they go, "You know what? I am a 9. Yeah, I'm a 10." I'm a 10. If they give you a lower than 8, you say to them, "You know, that's not bad. How come you're not just a 3 or 4?"
You know, or something, pick a number. And they'll tell you why. And whatever that reason is, you use that to get them to be a 10. And then it's okay. Now, here's the absolute key.
The next words out of your mouth have to be, then I think I can help you. Now, it'd be willing to take you on as a client. Just say, I think I can help you. Don't say, "We're going to cure that. Don't say, "Oh, those migrants will be history in a couple of weeks."
You know, or anything stupid, just say, "I think I can help you." And they're going to feel, "Oh, fantastic. Oh, thank God." And by the way, you only want this going to have gone through that thorough of a history session.
And make them think about it and get them committed. You know, if someone else had done it, they wouldn't be talking to you. If they'd done it well enough, they wouldn't need you.
So they need you. You got a lot of good work to do. So I'm spending a lot of time on this. Why? Well, because I care, I care about your practice and you being successful as an FDN. So I'm teaching you the absolute way to get commitments out of people.
And, you know, you get there. You get there, money. Because it's your profession. Not your hobby. Oh, by the way, for those of you who are hobbyists, that's okay. But this, I created the FDN program for those that would be deputized in the profession that would go out and duplicate the work.
So you're, you're welcome to hang out with us and work on yourself and your family or whatever as a hobby. But I'm talking to the professionals right now, those that want to be.
So you've decided to accept a new client. Ready? Willing? And in your assessment, able. I think this lady's able to do it. They have a commitment level in 9 or 10. They're willing to pay up front. They want to start right away.
Now, if you're not accepting them, you go back to those questions and they're goofing up every step of the way. Especially on the part about doesn't really bother me or I've learned to live with it or some of these other things I've heard.
Refer to them out. Tell them, look, I think you need to see a doctor that specializes in your condition that they're so convinced they have, you know, type of thing. Or you can get them into a group. If you do group coaching, some of those people you can get into a group because groups are cheaper.
They're not as big a financial commitment. Or you can say, listen, why don't you give me a call when you're ready? When you're ready, when you have the required support funds, commitment level, I'd be happy to help you.
But right now, you say that you've got a lot of people working against you. And I find that I don't get good results with people who can't stand the ground and do what's required of them. And also, you know, it is an investment that the funds are, you've got to be there. Maybe you could have a house sale or you could borrow it or, you know, something I don't know. But you know, you're going to have to find the resources to hire me and pay for the labs.
Or you know, hey, you and your commitment level, this isn't where it needs to be. If we can't get you up past an eight, then it's going to be really difficult. You're probably not going to follow through. So, you know, we're at that point of collecting, you know, you've decided to accept the client into your practice.
You're in agreement or reality about the program. In other words, they give you these reasonable expectations. More a question seven, what would you reasonably expect to get out of working with me? It just needs to be reasonable. That's all.
And if they're way, 200 pounds, and they say I want to be into a bathing suit in three weeks, you know what I'm talking about, they're not in reality, because you're getting into reality. Okay, yeah, I'm in reality with that. We're, you know, we're in sync.
And then you say, so I, you know, I've take, check cash or credit card. How would you like to pay, oh, credit card, let me get your card, my card by then and only then do mail in the test kits and you send them to email with the items.
Listed there, the MC score cards and the medical history form and the terms of agreement. And you can mail in the kits and you can put their credit card through.
And you can even email them a little bit back and forth, talk to them, you know, help them out with how to get the kits done and answer any questions they have.
But you don't give them any results, never give them a copy of their test results, never give them any consultation on the test results or protocols suggestions based on those test results.
If they haven't signed your terms of agreement, which we provide for you, all those things are in the document hub and terms of agreement or in the initial contact. And there's an email.
We could show it to you a template that you've taken use. Okay, that's going to be the end of this little video.
We're going to do a demonstration for you on how to use the case notes form.
Actually, you've already seen it, but I wanted to go over it again and emphasize how important it is. Then a few more slides and then another demo after that. So keep on trucking. You're almost ready to have a new client.
