Hello there. Welcome to ActiNs Medical Director Program Training. My name is Deborah Mendes. I am currently the MDP Department Director and I will be your host during this training. The goal of this training is to help you get a very clear understanding of what the MDP is. The services that we provide and I will also be helping you open your lab accounts and help you understand how to do this.
So, order lab kits from those labs and how to retrieve results as well. So, I hope that you come out of this training with your head really well wrapped around what the MDP is. So, this first lesson we're going to overview the services that the MDP provides.
What is the FDN Medical Director Program? The Medical Director Program is a full service lab testing and clinical support program created to support unlicensed FDN graduates and practicing FDN. Those who don't have a license practitioner to work with.
So, we are leveraging our Medical Director's license to help you get test kits into your clients' hands.
The MDP needs access to well chosen and vetted lab tests to successfully design and monitor effective dress for health success programs for clients. FDN practitioners use the MDP to order lab tests under the FDN Medical Director.
The MDP and practitioners can use their FDN designation to open direct accounts with several labs and third party distribution companies. However, there are specific tests and specific labs that won't work directly with an unlicensed practitioner.
The MDP and practitioners can use the MDP to order these tests. So, there will be times where you can order lab kits directly from your own accounts with the labs and then there are times where you can do that and then you need to use the MDP.
So, we provide order and services. The MDP facilitates ordering lab tests for FDN trainees and grads.
We also facilitate grads getting direct accounts. So, FDN has a credible relationship with lab companies and third party companies such as VECCA making it easy for FDN grads to open their own practitioner accounts with these organizations.
And the MDP also provides clinical support services. These are our clinical advisor sessions to support FDN grads post graduation.
So, the three steps of the lab ordering process. So, first, you have to get a signed agreement with your client. The second step is to order the lab kits and the third step is retrieve and analyze the test results.
So, how the MDP works, step one, terms of service agreement. So, the FDN practitioner and the client establishes a fee for services contract.
Otherwise, known as the terms of service agreement. This contract will describe what services will be rendered and how payment will be collected. So, you have to make it very clear in the terms of service agreement. What the payment breakdown is.
FDN practitioners services include expediting the shipment of the lab test kits directly to the client from the lab on behalf of the client.
And FDN practitioner cannot order labs for applying the way a doctor orders labs for diagnostic purposes. Rather, our clients are self-testing through a direct to consumer lab program. This is legal and ethical. So, you are always going to be working on behalf of your client.
Just like a lawyer works on behalf of their client, they're representing their client. It's very similar in this case as well. The client is hiring you to order the right tests to help them choose the right tests. Let's say, for them to order for themselves.
The terms of service agreement further establishes that the FDN practitioner will review the lab test results with no intention to diagnose or treat any specific disease or medical condition.
Rather, the lab reports are provided to the client for educational purposes only. So, the terms of service agreement is extremely important. Make sure that this is signed before you go and collect any sort of payment before you order any sort of labs for your client.
This agreement needs to be signed. It is a legal agreement. It helps you provide these services in a legal and ethical way to your client.
How the MDP works, step two, getting kits to your clients. So, this is the exciting part. So, after the terms of service agreement has been signed, you will order lab tests on behalf of your client.
There are three ways to order lab tests for your client, depending on the test you want to use. So, as mentioned before, you can use the MDP or you're going to be ordering directly from other companies. So ordering methods include the MDP. You can order tests by using FDA and medical director program.
You can also use third parties like a Vexia. So, the Vexia is a third party lab distributor that has a partnership with FDA. You can open a practitioner account with a Vexia under the FDA and umbrella by opening your own account with the Vexia under the FDA and umbrella. You do get quite a few perks by doing that.
And then you can order directly from the lab. So, FDA has developed relationship with several labs where you can open your own direct practitioner account using your FDNP credentials. So, when I'll show you how to do that at a later lesson.
And then there's step three is the results. So, per the terms of service agreement, the FDN practitioner receives completed lab tests for boards on behalf of their client.
The labs ordered through the MDP. The results will be emailed to you as soon as MDP receives them. So, please do not contact labs with which you do not have a direct account with. When you order through the MDP, the MDP is the liaison between you and the lab. So, all communication with the lab must go through the MDP, not the FDNP because you do not have a direct account with that lab.
The account is under our medical director. So, we handle any sort of issues, the results and such.
And please allow three weeks for results to be processed from the time the lab receives the sample. Okay. So, whenever you order from the MDP, we will email you the results.
The MDP can also get results back directly from the VACCO or the lab. So, if you open an account with the VACCO and if there's any lab that you open a direct account with, you will have access to your own portal where you will get notification and receive results that way.
So, here are examples of lab companies that you can order from directly. So, the blue-edged IQ, blood chemistry through DHA labs and the MRT through Oxford Biomedical. And then here are examples of lab companies that you must order from the MDP. So, DSL, depending on location, if you're client is from New York, Rhode Island or New Jersey, you will need to be ordering from the MDP because the VACCO does not service those three states.
So, ordering a Syrex lab, HTML from ARL, if you're ordering any of the vibrant tests, if you're a US based or international, you have to order from the MDP. If you are in Canada, you are able to open your own vibrant wellness account.
So, you can order through the medical director program includes a clinical advisor session and interpretation guidance from an FDN and clinical advisor. So, no matter what you order from the MDP, you will get a clinical advisor session.
And I highly recommend you use that to give you a lot of confidence in practicing FDN and interpreting the tests that you have ordered so that you can build a really strong protocol for your client and see that client succeed.
Who pays for the lab fees and MDP fees? So, there is the option to pay on behalf of your client. So, as the FDN practitioner, you can pay for your client's tests through your lab account or VACCO.
So, you can collect the money for the kids as part of your fees and then order MPA for the lab kids yourself. So, you're ordering the kids NPA for them on behalf of your client.
There is also the option to have your client pay. So, if you wish to have your client pay for their own tests, follow the instructions from each lab on how to do so and we will be going over that.
And each lab has a different method of payment. So, sometimes the payment is a payment link that gets sent to the client's email or sometimes it's a physical requisition form or the client has to write down the credit card information on the paper and send it back with their sample to the lab.
It is the responsibility of the FDNP to familiarize themselves with each lab's processes. So, as you can see each lab has a different process, so it's up to you to get very familiar with how each lab works.
The MDP feed. So, there is an MDP feed when you order from the MDP. The FDNP practitioner will always pay for the MDP feed because we have your credit card on file and that is the card that we're going to charge for that feed.
And we will go over in detail with that feed covers. Who can use the MDP? Trainings will run the basic labs taught in the FDN course on themselves. So, if you are a trainee, you have received or will receive test kits that you will run on yourself that has been covered by your tuition.
And then, active FDN graduates for in good standing can use the MDP. Use of the medical director program is not an automatic right or entitlement.
Use an access to the medical director program is a privilege earned and maintained by successfully completing the FDN certification course. Stricted hearings to using the terms of service agreement with all clients maintaining high ethical standards by staying within our scope of practice. So, we take our MDP program very seriously.
It's something that we make sure to keep legal and ethical. So, we trust that our grads will do the same. So, please make sure that you keep this in mind and like we stated earlier that only FDN graduates who are in good standing can use the MDP, would do have policies and would do have very strict procedures to follow so that everything can stay legal and ethical.
How to order the five FDN foundational labs. So, for Fluid's IQ, FDN practitioners will open an account with Fluid's IQ and order the SHP MWP and MBA directly from the lab.
Yes, I'll ask for the FDN practitioner to open an account with the Vexion and order the GI map from the Vexion. There are exceptions to this that we will go that will be that we will be going over in a later lesson.
For Biomedical Media to Release Test, the MRT, FDN practitioners will open an account with Oxford and open direct and order directly from the lab. And the later lesson you will learn how to open an account with these companies and how to order these tests.
We also provide clinical support. The MDP provides clinical support through our seasoned clinical advisors on staff.
When you order a test kit from the MDP and pay the MDP fee, you automatically receive a clinical advisory session.
If you order a test outside the MDP such as from a Vexia or directly from the lab, you can purchase a clinical advisor session separately. Clinical advisors sessions are highly recommended, whether you are a new FDN or a well seasoned FDN clinical advisor sessions help you see and think outside of the box from practicing FDN.
To summarize the MDP services, so the MDP is FDN's in-house lab, condoled and clinical support department, with our FDN certification, you will be able to order tests from the MDP, the Vexia and directly from certain labs.
The terms of service agreement must be signed prior to ordering labs for your client through the MDP. Using the MDP is a privilege that must be earned and maintained, not an automatic right.
From start to finish, you are working on behalf of your client for educational purposes. You are not diagnosing or treating a specific illness.
So that is an overview of the MDP services. We are going to be going in more detail in later lessons. I will see you there.
