Welcome back to AppDance Medical Director Program Training. In this lesson, we're going to be going over how to order task kits for international clients.
When you're ordering tasks for international clients, you will need to order through the MDP. The MDP offers many tasks to the international market,
so this is a benefit of using the MDP. We work with labs to get tasks to Europe, Australia, Mexico, some parts of Africa, some parts of Asia, and some parts of Central America.
We offer foundational tasks and non-foundational tasks to international clients. If there's a client in a certain area of the world where you are not certain,
whether the MDP or any of these labs service these areas, all you have to do is email the MDP and request send an inquiry with the client's address,
especially the country that they're from in the city, and then we will inquire with the labs for you to see which tasks you can order for that specific client.
Which labs and tasks does the MDP offer. So, labs that we work with internationally, is Nordic, precision and a little call, neutral path, neutral script for New Zealand, vibrant wellness, lifeline diagnostics for your HTML and most egg diagnostics.
And so these labs provide hormone profile testing, intestinal permeability, testing, food sensitivities, even the GI map, oxidative damage, you can also request an MDP diet assessment for your clients that live internationally, the oat, micro toxins, HTML and much more.
We do have special pricing when you're ordering task kits for international clients, so the MDP has special discounts on MDP fees for international orders.
So you can visit the MDP menu and on the left hand side you will see a more info button under international orders and a document will pop up that lists the current prices of these offers.
And these offers are for foundational labs only. So if you order all foundational, sorry, all five foundational labs for an international client, you will get a special price because the MDP fees do add up and we do acknowledge that.
And because you can order the foundational labs under your own accounts for US and Canada, we wanted to provide you with some special offers when it comes to ordering tasks for international clients because you can't order the foundational labs for international clients because you're not going to have your own account with these labs.
So how to navigate the MDP menu and order international tests. So go to fdnw.fdn connect.com and navigate the MDP tab and then click on the MDP menu.
You can find international tasks by utilizing the various filters the menu provides. So you can use the search bar.
So if you know the labs name or the tasks that you're wanting to order, you can use that search bar. You can also filter through the screening categories.
And then you can also filter through lab name. So you know for a fact that you, you know, Nordic is a name that pops up that you know that you can order Nordic tests for your clients and you can search up the ladening on Nordic.
Or if you want to check out if there's a HTML or a mineral or a heavy metal task available to the international client, you can filter through screening categories.
Same thing with the search bar. If you want to order an organic asset task for an international client, you can use the search bar and you will pop up and see and you will be able to see if it's available internationally.
So some in important notes when ordering international tests. So to order any of these these tasks, you must follow the process of ordering through the MDP, which we covered in early lesson up this training.
And sure you read the screening details carefully to understand the cost of the NDP fee and the cost of the test sample collection. Sorry, the cost of the test and the sample collection instructions and any other instruction and information you need to know that as you need to the lab or task you work ordering.
So not all labs are the same and the collection instructions can be different the shipping instructions can be different. So make sure you become very familiar and all that information is provided in the test page and I'll show you how to find that information.
So you need to become very familiar as well with the payment method and how to obtain the requisition form for that specific test and that specific lab because each lab like I said is different.
So let's go in and order some tasks we will go in and order from the MDP we will go over some details when ordering internationally and we will go over some payment options. So you're going to start in your FDN dashboard.
And you can find the medical director program you're going to click on medical director program test menu. And like I said you can filter this menu whichever way you like if you're looking for a specific test if you're looking for a specific screening.
So what you want to order from and you just want to see the different tests that that lab offers like Nordic is a very popular one that we use for international clients. You can see all of the labs that sort of all the tests that Nordic offers to international clients such as the hormone profile blood spot IGG.
Same thing with the test on permeability and here's that oxidative damage you can also filter the menu by the in by availability in terms of like geographic availability so you can click on international and all of the tests that are available internationally will pop up so.
We have the vibrant wellness is available internationally we do have precision and a liticle available to Australia. We also have you know some of doctors data and an HTML available internationally as well.
And the menu is not perfect so some tests like the fluids IQ may pop up under the international tab and we try very hard to clean this up. But sometimes you will see tests that are actually not available internationally but unfortunately there's we're trying to like fix the menu as best we can.
But the fluids IQ for example is not available internationally at least not as if yet. So like I said under this international orders here.
If you click more info this document will pop up and it lists out the medical director fee if you order all three tests for a Mexico for example and for other countries. You'll only pay a hundred and sixty five dollar mdp fee for ordering all five national labs through the mdp.
So that you're not paying seventy five or sixty five dollars per test this is a lot more cost effective if you just order this international package and the way to order this international package is just by emailing the mdp and arranging for you to order this for your client.
It's pretty straightforward and all the details are here for you. So if you want to order a test for a client that lives internationally it's pretty straightforward you just have to click the order now button under the Nordic labs for example.
And you fill out the mdp order form accordingly with all the information that we require to process the order for you.
And here's the form so you will fill this out again the menu is a perfect we are working on that so you do need to click on ship to my clients address here.
So I'm filling out the order form for the address some thing that we come across sometimes is that the country that your client lives in is not available. So what you will need to do is click other.
And the note section of the order form this is where you can put their full address so say they live in Japan and say Japan is not listed here you would click other under country and put their complete Japanese address in the note section and the mdp will take care of your order.
So just fill out the order form as best you can and if you have any questions please email the mdp at orders at afdmp.com.
Some things to note is that majority of the international tests on the mdp menu you do have the option to pay on behalf of your client so Nordic for example you can pay on behalf of your client because a payment link very similar to Oxford get sent to the email that you provide us with and you can pay on behalf of your client or your client can pay on on their own via that payment link.
But places but lots such as neutral path for example so if you're ordering for mutual path your client will actually have to put their payment information on a physical requisition form.
So this is where you know reading the confirmation email is very important because all that information will be there so that is what happens next so once you have placed your order the mdp will process it and send you a confirmation email and the mdp's confirmation email will contain instructions specific to the test you just ordered.
So information such as sample collection payment instructions and any other information regarding that specific test and that specific lab will be in that confirmation email so please read the information carefully to instruct your clients accordingly.
Once the results come in the mdp will email you the lab results along with the link to set up a clinical advising session which is included in the mdp fee so as you know from our earlier lesson the mdp does charge you for a fee when you're ordering through us but it does include a clinical advising session so that you can go over the test results with one of our clinical advisors.
So that is how you order international test kits for your clients for your international clients a lot of these tasks need to be ordered through the mdp there's a variety of tasks that are available to international clients.
You can just always you can always contact the mdp if you have any further questions about ordering for international clients I'll see you in the next lesson.
