Welcome back to FTN's Medical Director program training. In this lesson, we're going to be going over Oxford Biomedical Labs. We're going to be going over how to register for an account, how to order a test and how to retrieve results on Oxford's platform.
Have to set up a practitioner account. Oxford Biomedical provides the mediator release test i.e. the MRT. In the US only. Once you graduate, you will be eligible to open your own Oxford account and order the MRT directly from the lab.
You must have a North American address to open an account with Oxford. To register for your account log into fdn connect.com and select the medical director program. And once again, we will be going over this in detail.
So, one on the mdp menu, click on fdn foundational labs at the top to filter the menu. Oxford Biomedical Technology will be on the bottom right. So click on the blue button that says more info.
Under the screen details, you have to click on the embedded link that says open an Oxford account here. So that is going to be your registration link. So that's the link that you need to click on.
And then just some important notes when registering as a practitioner in Oxford's platform. So if you have to use your own name unless you have an established business name. Say yes to having legal authority to order.
Test kids for your clients and then choose fdnp as a credential. This is how Oxford is going to know that you are coming from fdn and that you're working under a medical director.
And you do not need an mdn number. So you don't need to enter that and you will be contact by Oxford via email once your account is active. So let's go in in order and MRT. So we'll go in and order from Oxford.
We're going to fill out their requisition form and we're going to go over some payment options as well. So you're going to start. I need your fdn connect dashboard under the medical director program drop down menu.
And you're going to click on medical director program test menu and we're going to filter the menu by clicking on fdn foundational apps. And then you're going to click on more info for Oxford biometical.
And again, the registration link is going to be found under the screening details under fdn graduates. You're going to see the hyperline correct here that's going to take you to the registration form.
So again, when you're filling out this registration form, make sure that you fill it out.
According to your business, if you have a business name and establish business name or registered was business name, you can put that. But we always recommend for you to put your own name in the first and last thing.
And then like I said, the credentials is going to be fdn p, which is right here, okay. When you when it says legal authority to order blood tests, you said.
As we do legally order blood testing because you're working in a medical director and then you can choose a specialty if you'd like. And then you fill out the rest of the form accordingly. Once you have your Oxford account, you are going to log into your Oxford account, your practitioner portal.
So you're going to create an MRT requisition form. This is how you're going to order a test kit for your client. Now you are going to be working under their medical director. So you're going to be working on this name here is going to be pre populated under their medical director.
And they know that you're coming from fdn so they're going to allow you to do that, okay. So you just click next and this is where you're going to fill out your patience information. So we're going to just put any old address here.
We're just going to make up a date of birth. Make sure you fill out the gender. Make sure that now I'm just going to put some. So make sure that your address is a US address. Sorry. So let's do.
So we're going to put an email there and just going to click next and then you're going to verify the information and click max. You don't have to list the medications. If you don't want to. If your client has not given you that you do not have to put any.
In medication in that section here. If you have your clinical correlation from your client, you can click on any sort of symptom that they might feel right here. If you don't have that yet for whatever reason, you can just click wellness or write it here in this box and click next.
And then you're going to select the task profile majority of people are choosing the MRT176 that is the most comprehensive and completed test and then you're going to click next.
In this section here, it's asking you if you want to send a hard copy of the test results to your client. This is completely up to you whether you do or you don't. You do have the option to not send a hard copy to your client.
You have the option to send it to yourself or you do have the option to send it to your client. For this example, we're just going to click do not send hard copy and click next. If you have any notes, you can write them down right here and then just click next.
Review your order and make sure that everything is correct. All the information is correct before you click max and submit the order.
And then this is the payment type. There's so many different ways to pay for the MRT. But the best and easiest way as it right now is for the patient to pay. So you can click on email secure link.
If you want to pay for your client's task kit, you can put your own email here and then the payment link is going to go to you. And then you just click here, please send patient or receipt and then you click submit.
And then on the next page, it's going to ask you to create a drop ship and all you're going to do is I'm not going to do that because it's going to send.
So you just click on the order and we don't want to do that. But it's going to ask you, would you like to drop ship a task kit for your client? You just say yes. And then again confirm the address and then you just click submit. And then it's going to give you an order number. It's going to say that your order was complete. And then you send.
Sorry, the lab will drop ship the task kit to your client. And then your client will receive the task kit. Make sure that your client has all the information they need to correctly collect the sample.
And submit the sample to the lab because I see it time and time again where the sample is not collected properly. It's old so that's not viable to be tested. And then the client has to go and recollect the sample and send it back to the lab.
So make sure that you instruct your clients accordingly. So if your client has collected the sample, they send the sample back to the lab and the lab has processed their sample. The lab will then send you an email to notify you that results are ready. And this is what it's going to look like. The email is going to look something like this with the link to go into your portal to download your clients results.
And once you click on the results link in the email and then you go into your portal, you're going to see a little download results button beside your clients.
Test kits, sorry your client's results and then you just download the results and you have them in hand and you can book your session with your client. So that is how you open your Oxford biomedical account that is how you order a test kit and that is how you retrieve the results.
And you can have any sort of pressure regarding your Oxford account. You can obviously email the MDP and you can always contact Oxford biomedical directly once you have an account because you do have a direct account with that. I will see you in the next lesson.
