Welcome back to FDN's Medical Director program training. In this lesson, we're going to be going over clinical advisor sessions.
What are clinical advisor sessions? So clinical advisor sessions are consultations that FDN grads get to schedule with one of our clinical advisors on staff.
Our clinical advisors are graduates from the FDN program who have mastered their own practices. So they are successful FDNs who are contracted to help FDN graduates.
The goal of the clinical advisor sessions is to ultimately increase your client's success rate. That is the entire point of the sessions is to help you master FDN.
The clinical advisors can help you see any blind spots you missed. Having a discussion with another professional about your client case is can give you great insight.
The way that I like to look at clinical advisor sessions is very similar to maintaining a car. When you drive your car out of the lot after you purchased it, there's a lot of maintenance that needs to happen. You don't just put gas into your car just once.
There's a maintenance that needs to happen and that is very similar when you're practicing FDN. You have to maintain a high level of education.
You understand how to interpret the tasks that you're ordering. Understand how to look at the cases that you're dealing with from a 30 feet overview.
So being an FDN graduate is really about being a forever student so that you can master also industry trends industry changes. There's always going to be new tasks on the market, new supplements on the market.
You want to niche down and you need help and speak with another professional about that. That's when you can both a clinical advisor session. Maybe you want to change your niche and you want to speak to a clinical advisor about it as well.
Maybe you're stuck in your practice. Maybe you want to shift your protocols and you want to balance your ideas off of another professional. Those are all reasons to book a clinical advisor session. So I love the clinical advisor sessions because you get to sit in this round table with professionals who can help you see outside of the box.
Especially because we work online. When you work online and you go and navigate the internet and the online world.
The information that you have access to is very it's curated to your own little bubble let's say. And I find that speaking to a clinical advisor can get me out of that bubble.
Because I only see things one way and they see something completely different that maybe I never thought about. So that is why I recommend you know really booking your clinical advisor sessions especially when you order tests through the MDP.
I find them really really helpful and they give me a lot of insight and they give a lot of our grads a lot of insight as well.
So just some points about clinical advisor session. So whenever you order a test get through the MDP you automatically get a clinical advisor session. So once you receive the results report, you will also receive a schedule scheduling link to book your clinical advisor session.
And like I said, I highly recommend to take advantage of that and book that session because you actually paid for it. It's included in the MDP fee.
Alternatively, you can purchase a clinical advisor session for any test that you order outside of the MDP. So such as the fluids IQ tests, the MRT through Oxford Biomedical, if you order any tests through VECCA, our clinical advisors can consult with you.
Clinical advisor sessions are widely used by our graduates. These sessions are used to help increase clients' success rate and graduates use the sessions for many reasons like I just stated earlier.
And the clinical advisor sessions are meant to help you interpret tests, build protocols, see the entire picture from a holistic point of view, and have a professional discussion about your client cases.
Clinical advisors are used, clinical advisor sessions are used by new grads and well-seasoned MDP practitioners.
I will say this right off the bat that all of the MDP grads that are super successful and their clients see really great results are the MDP grads who are using their clinical advisor sessions.
They want to learn, they want to continue learning, they really want to understand how to master FDN, and that's why they are so successful in either clients or so successful because they're having these professional discussions with our clinical advisors and really taking advantage of this service that the MDP provides.
The different types of clinical advisor sessions. The MDP offers different types of clinical advisor sessions. So we have a 30 minute session for you to interpret.
One task report, we have a 60 minute session to interpret two task reports for the same client.
We also have a 90 minute session. This is a case for you session where you can either go over all five foundational labs or equivalent to three to four tests that do not include foundational tests.
So what does that mean? So you can either go over all five foundational labs, which you know which those are, or three to four tests that are not foundational tests. So something like an HTML and out a micro-tox.
You can review that in a 90 minute session, all those three tests so that the clinical advisor can go over that with you.
We also offer something called a strategy session. So this session is meant to get clinical questions answered that are not tied to a specific client case.
Sometimes, you know, like I said, you know, maybe you want to me down or you want to change or you want to compare just clinically compare, you know, different tests that we offer on the MDP menu and you just want to see which test is best for your practice.
You can get a lot of clinical questions answered in these strategy sessions.
We have something called a clarity session, which is specifically scheduled with Dr. Jill Filo.
This session is meant for FDA and practitioners that feel stuck in their business or in their personal life and need some guidance.
Maybe you have graduated and you have a really hard time getting your FDA and business off the ground or you don't know what direction to take as a graduated FDA. Jill can help you gain some insight on how to forward as an FDA and succeed as an FDA.
Or maybe you have your own personal struggles and health struggles and you need some guidance with that and you want to work with someone to help you get out of your own health threat.
Dr. Jill Filo can help you with that and that is what the clarity session is for.
So let's go and purchase a clinical advisor session. So as always, you're going to start in your FDA and connect dashboard and navigate the medical director program tab and you're going to scroll down to clinical advisor consult. So let's go in and let me show you how to do that. So this is your FDA and connect dashboard under the medical director drop down menu. You're going to see clinical advisor consults.
And here we are going to list out all of the different sessions available to you. Please read this little blurb before ordering a test.
But it's pretty much explaining what I just explained the different sessions that we provide how the scheduling link is sent to you and that lab results are not reviewed in the clarity session or the strategy session because these are very different from the 30, the 60 and the 90 minute sessions. Okay.
There's also an overview of our services right here. We offer different sessions to accommodate your needs as an FDA and graduate. So like I said, we offer the 30 minute, 60 minute and 90 minute session to go over specific test results for specific clients.
And then we have that strategy session like I mentioned to go over your clinical questions that are not tied to specific cases and then you can find the clarity session here as well. So there are two different 30 minute options.
One is to go over one lab. And again, this can be allowed that you ordered directly through a Vexia or the Oxford MRT. That's what this is for here. And then we have these 30 minute add on sessions.
This is if you did order a say you ordered a GI map from the MDP, but then you also, but then you ordered maybe a thyroid panel from a Vexia and you want that 60 minute session.
You can add on minutes to the clinical advising session that you already have from that GI map that you ordered through the MDP. So we have some different options to accommodate what your needs are as an FDA and graduate.
And then we have a 60 minute blood chemistry session as well. This is specific to blood chemistry. So this is available to you. It is a 60 minute session because blood work does take some time to analyze and talk about and explain and interpret.
So here's that 90 minute case review. All the information is right here in terms of what the requirements are to book this session. Here is that strategy session that I just talked about. It's available in 30 minute sessions and in 60 minute sessions.
Here are some of the points that you can go over in the strategy session. So the clinical advisor can help you in no with test selection and application assist you in understanding further testing options beyond the foundational labs and surgical questions about test on the MDP menu.
Answer general clinical questions related to specific test markers answer general clinical questions that are not related to a particular case and then also answered clinical questions related to dress or FDN or industry trends or functional medicine as a whole.
And then they can also give you guidance on practicing FDN from a clinical perspective and here's that clutter clarity session with Dr. Jill Filo.
Again, this this session is very specific for people who feel stuck and overwhelmed in their practice. People who feel like their FDN journey is not what they hoped for.
People who have been cracked their code of their own personal health or your struggling with imposter syndrome or you're dealing with really complex cases that loan badge and you're starting to get discouraged. That is what this clarity session is.
So all you have to do is click on one of these buttons to purchase the session. So this is what the session order form is going to look like. You're going to go ahead and put all of your information in here on the next page.
It will ask you what the session is for like which test you're wanting to review when you can just simply fill out that form and then you once we receive that form you will receive the you will receive the scheduling link to book your session.
So you will again email confirmation within 24 hours that gives you the information you will need to attend your clinical advisor session. So every clinical advisor does have different needs.
When you are booking a session with them, but these are some processes and policies that you need to keep in mind when booking a clinical advisor session. So once you receive your schedule and link you will be able to choose the clinical advisor you'd like to consult with and schedule your consult with them.
So you will need to follow that CAs instructions to hand over your case notes and copies of test reports if it's applicable to that session. So if you booked a 30, 60 or 90 minute session, the clinical advisor does need a copy of those test results. So that they can review because the clinical advisors do a lot of work in the background, right? They need to prepare for the session so that they can really have a very effective consultation with you.
That's why they need to see those test reports.
If it's a strategy session, of course, that's a different for the clarity session with DEL, that's different as well. You can give her some information over email, depending on what it is that you want to discuss with her.
FDNs will be charged a late fee or a no-show fee for providing, for not, sorry, providing a 48 hour cancellation notice to the clinical advisor.
Our CAs, they book up fairly quickly and their time is very valuable. So if you don't tell them, you know, that you're canceling the consultation with a 48 hour notice, we will charge you a late fee or a no-show fee for not providing any sort of explanation for not showing up or canceling your consultation with a clinical advisor.
The copy of the test results and completed FDN case notes must be emailed to the clinical advisor at 48 hours prior to the schedule appointment.
If required documents are not provider prior to the appointment, your appointment may be canceled by the clinical advisor.
Again, the clinical advisors work very hard behind the scenes. They need as much as information as you can provide to them so that they can have an effective consultation with you.
They want to be able to help you, but they need the information so that they can prepare for the session prior.
So if you don't hand in any sort of information to them, 48 hours prior to your schedule appointment, they do have the right to cancel the consultation and you will need to reschedule.
So just keep these things in mind and we just ask that you respect the clinical advisors time. If you say, say, you want to bulk a clinical advisor session for tomorrow, just make sure that you hand in all of the information.
As soon as you bulk that session and you can email the clinical advisors say, hey, I saw that your schedule will be opened up. Here's all the information. What else do you need for me to prepare for this session? Okay, so just be respectful to our clinical advisors because they are working very hard behind the scenes.
You will then have your session with your clinical advisor and that's pretty much it in terms of clinical advising sessions. Again, I highly recommend these so that you can master the art of practicing FDN and so that you can increase your client success rate and increase success in your practice. I will see you in the next lesson.
