Hello and welcome back to FDN's Medical Director program training. So in this lesson, I'm going to be teaching you how to open an AVAXI account and how to navigate AVAXI's platform. What is AVAXI? AVAXI diagnostics is a lab ordering platform that allows FDN practitioners to order multiple FDN approved tests in one place. So we're talking about the GI map, blood work, a test from just a test.
AVAXI services clients in the USA, Canada and Puerto Rico. AVAXI does not service the state of New York, New Jersey and Rhode Island. So this is a very important note to take because if you have a client that lives in one of these states, you will not be able to order any sort of test kit for them on AVAXI's platform. Also, if you are an FDN who lives in one of these states, you will not be able to order any sort of test kit for them on AVAXI's platform.
Also, if you are an FDN who lives in one of these states, you won't be able to open an AVAXI account. So in that case, you will always have the MDP to order from. So even if you are a FDN who lives in New York, but you need to order for a client in Georgia or Montana, that's alright. You can use the MDP because we know that you, the FDN cannot open your own AVAXI account.
And you need to order from us. With AVAXI, you will get practitioner pricing. You will be able to pay on behalf of your client, track their orders and easily access results as well.
And FDN practitioners get special perks when signing up with AVAXI under the FDN umbrella, and I will be going over some of these perks in a little bit.
How to set up a practitioner account. So as always, you will always start in your FDN Connect dashboard and under the Medical Director program tab, you're going to click on the VACSHA diagnostics. And I will be going over this with you in detail.
You will then click on Open your IVAXI account, use Code AFDNP, and then on the next page over you're going to click on Register now.
This is about the VACSHA registration form looks like, and these are just some important notes to take. Always use your own name unless you have an established business name. So your own first name in last name.
Always select, clinician, not licensed to order labs in the USA option. The reason why you want to do this is so that because you are not going to have an NPI number as an FDN graduate, and if you do not select this option, a VACSHA will need your NPI number.
Always ensure that the AFDNP code is entered under the referral code so that you can open your account under FDN Zembrella and get those perks that VACSHA provides to FDN graduates. And I'll show you what those perks are.
You do not need it to enter an NPI number again. If you click on that clinician, not licensed to order labs in the USA option, a VACSHA will not ask you for an NPI number.
Once you fill this form out, if Exit will contact you via email and by phone, and they will ask you for a copy of your FDN certification. So you need to provide that for them to be able to activate your account.
And then they're going to invite you to an onboarding call, which we highly recommend you go to, so that you can understand the logistics of their platform.
How tests are ordered in detail, they're going to go over the requisition form with UNDTEL and how to find results in detail as well.
So things to know about your FDN VACSHA account. So FDN practitioners get pre-populated FDN selected blood panels, and I'll show you how to find these under my custom panels under their featured section.
So this is one of the perks that you get when you open it enough to get an account with VACSHA, because FDN does have all different kinds of blood panels that we promote.
And these are already pre-populated for you, so that you don't have to go into a VACSHA platform and have to select them all and get to work with the VACSHA to add is to your account. They will already be there.
Since you have your own VACSHA account, you can contact VACSHA directly for any inquiry you may have, so because you have that direct relationship with VACSHA, you can contact them freely.
Your clients results will be uploaded to your VACSHA account for easy access. So a lot of our grads really like this feature, because you can easily access your results in your own portal.
And you don't have to, it's not going to be sent to you from the MDP, you can just instantly have access to the results once you get that notification from the VACSHA that the results have been posted.
FDN practitioners have access to a white label and marketing from the VACSHA. This is a really great feature, especially when you are a new grad.
When you first graduate, you have a lot to think about. There's a lot of business that needs to be set up and it can be pretty overwhelming. So I highly recommend taking advantage of the fact that a VACSHA will provide you with white label marketing materials so that you can start to market your business right away and get your name out there.
And you don't really have to think about it very much. All you have to do is post the content that they create for you. And they will have a meeting with you so that you can provide your color swatches, the vibe of your business, the language, all of that could stop. All you have to do is contact their team and they will help you set get that set up.
So let's go in and open our VACSHA account and navigate their platform a little bit to see what it looks like. So like I said, you're going to start in your FDN dashboard and you're going to click and you're going to go and navigate under the medical director program tab and you're going to click on a VACSHA diagnosis, which is going to take you to this page here.
This page is going to have some information for you regarding VACSHA. So just have a read there and then to open your account you're going to click on this button here.
Which will then take you to this page, which has more information about VACSHA and then you can click on the register now button, which will then take you to their registration form. So we just went over this form. So again you fill this out accordingly.
Make sure that under the referral code, the AFDNP code is in there if it's not just fill it in and then you're going to click on the clinician, not license to order labs in the US. So that you can skip the NPI number question.
Sometimes you have to click add this and then just so that it kind of sticks to the registration form and then you're going to click on sign up. You're going to get a notification that VACSHA has received your request. They will again contact you to activate your account and you will need to provide your FDN certification so that you can get all the perks that it VACSHA provides to FDN grads.
And then you're going to have your account activated and you'll be able to log into your account. Oops.
So once you're logged in, this is what your dashboard is going to look like and where you can start working front is the left-hand side right here.
So first we're going to click on test menu. Here you're going to see all the labs that you're able to order through your VACSHA account.
Okay, and on the right-hand side here you're going to see this my custom panels. Here is where you're going to find all the blood work that is going to be pre-populated for you. So we've done all the legwork for you to add all the blood panels that we promote in the FDN community.
One thing to note about the blood panels here is that any panel that has a number and an M means that you're ordering from access medlamps.
And what that means that that is for any client that lives in a rural area that does not have easy access to a lab court or if they are a Canadian client.
So if they're a Canadian client, they'll be able to go to dinacare to get their blood drawn and if it's for a client in the US, they can go to any sort of local hospital to get their blood drawn if you're ordering from access medlamps.
So that's what that means. If you do not see this list of custom blood panels in your VACSHA account, just contact your VACSHA directly or you can contact the MDP and we'll get these added for you.
So now we're going to go back to our dashboard and you're going to click on order labs and it's going to take you to your patient dashboard.
So you can add your new patient or you can choose existing clients. It really depends. I have pre populated my fake client here, Jane Smith. So we're going to click on Jane Smith and we're going to order a GI map for Jane Smith. So all we're going to do is click on add new order for Jane Smith.
And the AML is the access med labs. So that's right here and because I'm in Canada, this is one of the only sorry because my client her account is under a Canadian address.
That's why it's giving me the access med labs option. If your client lives in the US, it's going to give you lab corp and access med labs and then plus the specialty labs.
So all the stool tests, hormone tests is all going to be under specialty labs. So that's what we're going to click on.
And because I have added GI maps to my favorites, it's going to be at the top here. So if you want to make things easy for you as you go through the list of all the tests that are provided through
the VACSIA, this little star here will add the tests to your favorites and it's going to show up at the top here for easy access. And then all you have to do is click this plus sign to add it to your cart and then you're going to click next.
And it's going to take you to this page here, make sure that you verify your client information, make sure that you verify the name, that you're the practitioner of this order.
Verify your order, edit if you needed to, and then you're going to click this button down here. That says I agree to the terms and conditions of the service and then you're going to place your order. Okay.
Then your client's going to get their test kit, they're going to send it in and once the results are posted, you're going to get a notification from a VACSIA that the results are in.
And then you're going to go back to your dashboard here and on the left hand side, you're going to see lab results. And here is where you're going to find your clients results.
So that is how you navigate the VACSIA platform. It is very easy to navigate, very easy to open at your account and to retrieve results as well. So what happens next?
So once the results are in, you will receive an email from a VACSIA that your clients results have been posted.
And then like I said, you'll go into the dashboard and retrieve the results from there.
You can then purchase a clinical advisor session to go over the results. So clinical advisor sessions are not included when you purchase a task kit outside of the MDP such as when you're ordering.
A task kit from a VACSIA. But you can always purchase them and we highly recommend clinical advisor sessions to go over your task results so that you're interpreting them properly. So that the clinical advisor can give you guidance and clarity in regards to your client's case.
So then you can go ahead and purchase your clinical advisor session. We will be going over how to do that in a later lesson. And then you can just show out for your session. Make sure that you're prepared. Make sure that you provided your clinical advisor with all the information that they need so that they can have a really effective clinical advisor session with you.
Ask all the questions that you might have in regards to the tests that you are going to review in with your clinical advisor and any questions that you may have regarding a protocol. But that is a VACSIA for you. And I will see you in the next lesson.
